Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government 

 

 



 

By the Comptroller General of the United States 

September 2014 

 

GAO-14-704G 

 

 

United States Government Accountability Office 




Contents 

Overview 1 
Foreword 1 
How to Use the Green Book 3 
Section 1 - Fundamental Concepts of Internal Control 5 
Definition of Internal Control 5 
Definition of an Internal Control System 5 
Section 2 - Establishing an Effective Internal Control System 6 
Presentation of Standards 6 
Components, Principles, and Attributes 7 
Internal Control and the Entity 9 
Roles in an Internal Control System 11 
Objectives of an Entity 12 
Section 3 - Evaluation of an Effective Internal Control System 14 
Factors of Effective Internal Control 15 
Evaluation of Internal Control 15 
Section 4 - Additional Considerations 17 
Service Organizations 17 
Large versus Small Entities 18 
Benefits and Costs of Internal Control 19 
Documentation Requirements 19 
Use by Other Entities 20 
Control Environment 21 
Principle 1 - Demonstrate Commitment to Integrity and Ethical 
Values 22 
Tone at the Top 22 
Standards of Conduct 23 
Adherence to Standards of Conduct 23 
Principle 2 - Exercise Oversight Responsibility 24 
Oversight Structure 24 
Oversight for the Internal Control System 26 
Input for Remediation of Deficiencies 27 
Principle 3 - Establish Structure, Responsibility, and Authority 27 
Organizational Structure 27 
Assignment of Responsibility and Delegation of Authority 28 
Documentation of the Internal Control System 29 
Principle 4 - Demonstrate Commitment to Competence 30 
Expectations of Competence 30 
Recruitment, Development, and Retention of Individuals 31 
Succession and Contingency Plans and Preparation 31 
Principle 5 - Enforce Accountability 32 
Enforcement of Accountability 32 
Consideration of Excessive Pressures 33 
Risk Assessment 34 
Principle 6 - Define Objectives and Risk Tolerances 35 
Definitions of Objectives 35 
Definitions of Risk Tolerances 36 
Principle 7 - Identify, Analyze, and Respond to Risks 37 
Identification of Risks 37 
Analysis of Risks 38 
Response to Risks 39 
Principle 8 - Assess Fraud Risk 40 
Types of Fraud 40 
Fraud Risk Factors 41 
Response to Fraud Risks 41 
Principle 9 - Identify, Analyze, and Respond to Change 42 
Identification of Change 42 
Analysis of and Response to Change 43 
Control Activities 44 
Principle 10 - Design Control Activities 45 
Response to Objectives and Risks 45 
Design of Appropriate Types of Control Activities 45 
Design of Control Activities at Various Levels 49 
Segregation of Duties 50 
Principle 11 - Design Activities for the Information System 51 
Design of the Entity’s Information System 51 
Design of Appropriate Types of Control Activities 53 
Design of Information Technology Infrastructure 53 
Design of Security Management 54 
Design of Information Technology Acquisition, Development, 
and Maintenance 55 
Principle 12 - Implement Control Activities 56 
Documentation of Responsibilities through Policies 56 
Periodic Review of Control Activities 56 
Information and Communication 58 
Principle 13 - Use Quality Information 59 
Identification of Information Requirements 59 

Relevant Data from Reliable Sources 59 
Data Processed into Quality Information 59 
Principle 14 - Communicate Internally 60 
Communication throughout the Entity 60 
Appropriate Methods of Communication 61 
Principle 15 - Communicate Externally 62 
Communication with External Parties 62 
Appropriate Methods of Communication 63 
Monitoring 64 
Principle 16 - Perform Monitoring Activities 65 
Establishment of a Baseline 65 
Internal Control System Monitoring 65 
Evaluation of Results 66 
Principle 17 - Evaluate Issues and Remediate Deficiencies 67 
Reporting of Issues 67 
Evaluation of Issues 68 
Corrective Actions 68 
Appendix I Requirements 70 
Appendix II Acknowledgments 73 
Comptroller General’s Advisory Council on Standards for Internal 
Control in the Federal Government (2013-2015) 73 
GAO Project Team 74 
Staff Acknowledgments 74 
Glossary 75 
Figures 
Figure 1: Green Book Sample Page 4 
Figure 2: Achieving Objectives through Internal Control 5 
Figure 3: The Five Components and 17 Principles of Internal 
Control 9 
Figure 4: The Components, Objectives, and Organizational 
Structure of Internal Control 10 
Figure 5: The 17 Principles Supporting the Five Components of 
Internal Control 11 
Figure 6: Examples of Common Categories of Control Activities 46 
This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the 
United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety 
without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain 
copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be 
necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. 




 

Overview 



Foreword 



Policymakers and program managers are continually seeking ways to 
improve accountability in achieving an entity’s mission. A key factor in 
improving accountability in achieving an entity’s mission is to implement 
an effective internal control system. An effective internal control system 
helps an entity adapt to shifting environments, evolving demands, 
changing risks, and new priorities. As programs change and entities strive 
to improve operational processes and implement new technology, 
management continually evaluates its internal control system so that it is 
effective and updated when necessary. 

 
Section 3512 (c) and (d) of Title 31 of the United States Code (commonly 
known as the Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act (FMFIA)) requires 
the Comptroller General to issue standards for internal control in the 
federal government. Standards for Internal Control in the Federal 
Government (known as the Green Book), provide the overall framework 
for establishing and maintaining an effective internal control system. 
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular No. A-123 provides 
specific requirements for assessing and reporting on controls in the 
federal government. The term internal control in this document covers all 
aspects of an entity’s objectives (operations, reporting, and compliance). 

The Green Book may also be adopted by state, local, and quasigovernmental 
entities, as well as not-for-profit organizations, as a 
framework for an internal control system. Management of an entity 
determines, based on applicable laws and regulations, how to 
appropriately adapt the standards presented in the Green Book as a 
framework for the entity. 

The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway 
Commission (COSO) updated its internal control guidance in 2013 with 
the issuance of a revised Internal Control - Integrated Framework.1 
COSO introduced the concept of principles related to the five components 
of internal control. The Green Book adapts these principles for a 
government environment. 

1See Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission, Internal 
Control - Integrated Framework (New York: American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants, 2013). 


The standards are effective beginning with fiscal year 2016 and the 
FMFIA reports covering that year. Management, at its discretion, may 
elect early adoption of the Green Book. 

This revision of the standards has gone through an extensive deliberative 
process, including public comments and input from the Comptroller 
General’s Advisory Council on Standards for Internal Control in the 
Federal Government. The advisory council consists of about 20 experts in 
financial and performance management drawn from federal, state, and 
local government; the private sector; and academia. The views of all 
parties were thoroughly considered in finalizing the standards. 

I appreciate the efforts of government officials, public accounting 
professionals, and other members of the audit and academic 
communities who provided valuable assistance in developing these 
standards. I extend special thanks to the members of the Advisory 
Council on Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government for 
their extensive input and feedback throughout the entire process of 
developing and finalizing the standards. 

 

Gene L. Dodaro 

Comptroller General 

of the United States 

 

September 2014 


How to Use the 
Green Book 



The Green Book provides managers criteria for designing, implementing, 
and operating an effective internal control system. The Green Book 
defines the standards through components and principles and explains 
why they are integral to an entity’s internal control system. The Green 
Book clarifies what processes management considers part of internal 
control. In a mature and highly effective internal control system, internal 
control may be indistinguishable from day-to-day activities personnel 
perform. 

The Green Book is structured as follows: 

1. An Overview, which includes the following sections: 
• Section 1: an overview of the fundamental concepts of internal 
control 
• Section 2: a discussion of internal control components, principles, 
and attributes; how these relate to an entity’s objectives; and the 
three categories of objectives 
• Section 3: a discussion of the evaluation of the entity’s internal 
control system’s design, implementation, and operation 
• Section 4: additional considerations that apply to all components 
in an internal control system 


 

2. A discussion of the requirements for each of the five components and 
17 principles as well as discussion of the related attributes, including 
documentation requirements. 


The Green Book clearly indicates the component and principle 
requirements through the use of “must” and “should.” Further discussion 
of these requirements is included in section 2 of the Overview. 
Documentation requirements are summarized in section 4 of the 
Overview. 

Figure 1 depicts a sample page from the Green Book. This illustration 
identifies the components, principles, and attributes of the Green Book, 
which are further discussed in section 2 of the Overview. 


Figure 1: Green Book Sample Page 

 

 

 

 


Section 1 - 
Fundamental 
Concepts of Internal 
Control 



 

 

 

 

Definition of Internal 
Control 



OV1.01 Internal control is a process effected by an entity’s oversight 
body, management, and other personnel that provides reasonable 
assurance that the objectives of an entity will be achieved (see fig. 2). 
These objectives and related risks can be broadly classified into one or 
more of the following three categories: 

• Operations - Effectiveness and efficiency of operations 
• Reporting - Reliability of reporting for internal and external use 
• Compliance - Compliance with applicable laws and regulations 


 

Figure 2: Achieving Objectives through Internal Control 

 

 

OV1.02 These are distinct but overlapping categories. A particular 
objective can fall under more than one category, can address different 
needs, and may be the direct responsibility of different individuals. 

OV1.03 Internal control comprises the plans, methods, policies, and 
procedures used to fulfill the mission, strategic plan, goals, and objectives 
of the entity. Internal control serves as the first line of defense in 
safeguarding assets. In short, internal control helps managers achieve 
desired results through effective stewardship of public resources. 

 

Definition of an Internal 
Control System 



OV1.04 An internal control system is a continuous built-in component of 
operations, effected by people, that provides reasonable assurance, not 
absolute assurance, that an entity’s objectives will be achieved. 


OV1.05 Internal control is not one event, but a series of actions that occur 
throughout an entity’s operations. Internal control is recognized as an 
integral part of the operational processes management uses to guide its 
operations rather than as a separate system within an entity. In this 
sense, internal control is built into the entity as a part of the organizational 
structure to help managers achieve the entity’s objectives on an ongoing 
basis. 

OV1.06 People are what make internal control work. Management is 
responsible for an effective internal control system. As part of this 
responsibility, management sets the entity’s objectives, implements 
controls, and evaluates the internal control system. However, personnel 
throughout an entity play important roles in implementing and operating 
an effective internal control system. 

OV1.07 An effective internal control system increases the likelihood that 
an entity will achieve its objectives. However, no matter how well 
designed, implemented, or operated, an internal control system cannot 
provide absolute assurance that all of an organization’s objectives will be 
met. Factors outside the control or influence of management can affect 
the entity’s ability to achieve all of its objectives. For example, a natural 
disaster can affect an organization’s ability to achieve its objectives. 
Therefore, once in place, effective internal control provides reasonable, 
not absolute, assurance that an organization will achieve its objectives. 

 

Section 2 - 
Establishing an 
Effective Internal 
Control System 



 

 

 

 

Presentation of Standards 



OV2.01 The Green Book defines the standards for internal control in the 
federal government. FMFIA requires federal executive branch entities to 
establish internal control in accordance with these standards. The 
standards provide criteria for assessing the design, implementation, and 
operating effectiveness of internal control in federal government entities 
to determine if an internal control system is effective. Nonfederal entities 


Overview 

may use the Green Book as a framework to design, implement, and 
operate an internal control system.2 

OV2.02 The Green Book applies to all of an entity’s objectives: 
operations, reporting, and compliance. However, these standards are not 
intended to limit or interfere with duly granted authority related to 
legislation, rulemaking, or other discretionary policy making in an 
organization. In implementing the Green Book, management is 
responsible for designing the policies and procedures to fit an entity’s 
circumstances and building them in as an integral part of the entity’s 
operations. 

Components, Principles, 
and Attributes 

OV2.03 An entity determines its mission, sets a strategic plan, 
establishes entity objectives, and formulates plans to achieve its 
objectives. Management, with oversight from the entity’s oversight body, 
may set objectives for an entity as a whole or target activities within the 
entity. Management uses internal control to help the organization achieve 
these objectives. While there are different ways to present internal 
control, the Green Book approaches internal control through a 
hierarchical structure of five components and 17 principles. The hierarchy 
includes requirements for establishing an effective internal control 
system, including specific documentation requirements. 

OV2.04 The five components represent the highest level of the hierarchy 
of standards for internal control in the federal government. The five 
components of internal control must be effectively designed, 
implemented, and operating, and operating together in an integrated 
manner, for an internal control system to be effective. The five 
components of internal control are as follows: 

• 
Control Environment -The foundation for an internal control system. 
It provides the discipline and structure to help an entity achieve its 
objectives. 
• 
Risk Assessment -Assesses the risks facing the entity as it seeks to 
achieve its objectives. This assessment provides the basis for 
developing appropriate risk responses. 
2See para. OV4.10 for further discussion on use by other entities. 

Page 7 GAO-14-704G Federal Internal Control Standards 


• Control Activities - The actions management establishes through 
policies and procedures to achieve objectives and respond to risks in 
the internal control system, which includes the entity’s information 
system. 
• Information and Communication - The quality information 
management and personnel communicate and use to support the 
internal control system. 
• Monitoring - Activities management establishes and operates to 
assess the quality of performance over time and promptly resolve the 
findings of audits and other reviews. 


 

OV2.05 The 17 principles support the effective design, implementation, 
and operation of the associated components and represent requirements 
necessary to establish an effective internal control system. 

OV2.06 In general, all components and principles are relevant for 
establishing an effective internal control system. In rare circumstances, 
there may be an operating or regulatory situation in which management 
has determined that a principle is not relevant for the entity to achieve its 
objectives and address related risks. If management determines that a 
principle is not relevant, management supports that determination with 
documentation that includes the rationale of how, in the absence of that 
principle, the associated component could be designed, implemented, 
and operated effectively. In addition to principle requirements, the Green 
Book contains documentation requirements. 

OV2.07 The Green Book contains additional information in the form of 
attributes. These attributes are intended to help organize the application 
material management may consider when designing, implementing, and 
operating the associated principles. Attributes provide further explanation 
of the principle and documentation requirements and may explain more 
precisely what a requirement means and what it is intended to cover, or 
include examples of procedures that may be appropriate for an entity. 
Attributes may also provide background information on matters 
addressed in the Green Book. 

OV2.08 Attributes are relevant to the proper implementation of the Green 
Book. Management has a responsibility to understand the attributes and 
exercise judgment in fulfilling the requirements of the standards. The 
Green Book, however, does not prescribe how management designs, 
implements, and operates an internal control system. 


OV2.09 Figure 3 lists the five components of internal control and 17 
related principles. 

Figure 3: The Five Components and 17 Principles of Internal Control 

 

 

 

Internal Control and the 
Entity 



OV2.10 A direct relationship exists among an entity’s objectives, the five 
components of internal control, and the organizational structure of an 
entity. Objectives are what an entity wants to achieve. The five 
components of internal control are what are required of the entity to 
achieve the objectives. Organizational structure encompasses the 
operating units, operational processes, and other structures management 


Overview 

uses to achieve the objectives. This relationship is depicted in the form of 
a cube developed by COSO (see fig. 4).3 

Figure 4: The Components, Objectives, and Organizational Structure of Internal 
Control 


OV2.11 The three categories into which an entity’s objectives can be 
classified are represented by the columns labeled on top of the cube. The 
five components of internal control are represented by the rows. The 
organizational structure is represented by the third dimension of the cube. 

OV2.12 Each component of internal control applies to all three categories 
of objectives and the organizational structure. The principles support the 
components of internal control (see fig. 5). 

3See paras. 3.02 through 3.05 for further discussion of organizational structure. 

Page 10 GAO-14-704G Federal Internal Control Standards 


Figure 5: The 17 Principles Supporting the Five Components of Internal Control 

 

 

OV2.13 Internal control is a dynamic, iterative, and integrated process in 
which components impact the design, implementation, and operating 
effectiveness of each other. No two entities will have an identical internal 
control system because of differences in factors such as mission, 
regulatory environment, strategic plan, entity size, risk tolerance, and 
information technology, and the judgment needed in responding to these 
differing factors. 

 

Roles in an Internal 
Control System 



OV2.14 Because internal control is a part of management’s overall 
responsibility, the five components are discussed in the context of the 
management of the entity. However, everyone in the entity has a 
responsibility for internal control. In general, roles in an entity’s internal 
control system can be categorized as follows: 

• Oversight body - The oversight body is responsible for overseeing 
the strategic direction of the entity and obligations related to the 
accountability of the entity. This includes overseeing management’s 
design, implementation, and operation of an internal control system. 
For some entities, an oversight body might be one or a few members 
of senior management. For other entities, multiple parties may be 
members of the entity’s oversight body. For the purpose of the Green 
Book, oversight by an oversight body is implicit in each component 
and principle. 



• Management - Management is directly responsible for all activities of 
an entity, including the design, implementation, and operating 
effectiveness of an entity’s internal control system. Managers’ 
responsibilities vary depending on their functions in the organizational 
structure. 
• Personnel - Personnel help management design, implement, and 
operate an internal control system and are responsible for reporting 
issues noted in the entity’s operations, reporting, or compliance 
objectives.4 


4See paras. 17.02 through 17.04 for further discussion on identifying issues. 

 

OV2.15 External auditors and the office of the inspector general (OIG), if 
applicable, are not considered a part of an entity’s internal control system. 
While management may evaluate and incorporate recommendations by 
external auditors and the OIG, responsibility for an entity’s internal control 
system resides with management. 

 

Objectives of an Entity 



OV2.16 Management, with oversight by an oversight body, sets 
objectives to meet the entity’s mission, strategic plan, and goals and 
requirements of applicable laws and regulations. Management sets 
objectives before designing an entity’s internal control system. 
Management may include setting objectives as part of the strategic 
planning process. 

OV2.17 Management, as part of designing an internal control system, 
defines the objectives in specific and measurable terms to enable 
management to identify, analyze, and respond to risks related to 
achieving those objectives. 

Categories of Objectives 

OV2.18 Management groups objectives into one or more of the three 
categories of objectives: 

• Operations - Effectiveness and efficiency of operations 
• Reporting - Reliability of reporting for internal and external use 
• Compliance - Compliance with applicable laws and regulations 


 


Operations Objectives 

OV2.19 Operations objectives relate to program operations that achieve 
an entity’s mission. An entity’s mission may be defined in a strategic plan. 
Such plans set the goals and objectives for an entity along with the 
effective and efficient operations necessary to fulfill those objectives. 
Effective operations produce the intended results from operational 
processes, while efficient operations do so in a manner that minimizes the 
waste of resources. 

OV2.20 Management can set, from the objectives, related subobjectives 
for units within the organizational structure. By linking objectives 
throughout the entity to the mission, management improves the 
effectiveness and efficiency of program operations in achieving the 
mission. 

Reporting Objectives 

OV2.21 Reporting objectives relate to the preparation of reports for use 
by the entity, its stakeholders, or other external parties. Reporting 
objectives may be grouped further into the following subcategories: 

• External financial reporting objectives - Objectives related to the 
release of the entity’s financial performance in accordance with 
professional standards, applicable laws and regulations, as well as 
expectations of stakeholders. 
• External nonfinancial reporting objectives - Objectives related to 
the release of nonfinancial information in accordance with appropriate 
standards, applicable laws and regulations, as well as expectations of 
stakeholders. 
• Internal financial reporting objectives and nonfinancial reporting 
objectives - Objectives related to gathering and communicating 
information needed by management to support decision making and 
evaluation of the entity’s performance. 


 

Compliance Objectives 

OV2.22 In the government sector, objectives related to compliance with 
applicable laws and regulations are very significant. Laws and regulations 
often prescribe a government entity’s objectives, structure, methods to 
achieve objectives, and reporting of performance relative to achieving 
objectives. Management considers objectives in the category of 
compliance comprehensively for the entity and determines what controls 


are necessary to design, implement, and operate for the entity to achieve 
these objectives effectively. 

OV2.23 Management conducts activities in accordance with applicable 
laws and regulations. As part of specifying compliance objectives, the 
entity determines which laws and regulations apply to the entity. 
Management is expected to set objectives that incorporate these 
requirements. Some entities may set objectives to a higher level of 
performance than established by laws and regulations. In setting those 
objectives, management is able to exercise discretion relative to the 
performance of the entity. 

Safeguarding of Assets 

OV2.24 A subset of the three categories of objectives is the safeguarding 
of assets. Management designs an internal control system to provide 
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or prompt detection and 
correction of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of an entity’s 
assets. 

Setting Subobjectives 

OV2.25 Management can develop from objectives more specific 
subobjectives throughout the organizational structure. Management 
defines subobjectives in specific and measurable terms that can be 
communicated to the personnel who are assigned responsibility to 
achieve these subobjectives. Both management and personnel require an 
understanding of an objective, its subobjectives, and defined levels of 
performance for accountability in an internal control system. 

 

Section 3 - Evaluation 
of an Effective 
Internal Control 
System 



OV3.01 The purpose of this section is to provide management with 
factors to consider in evaluating the effectiveness of an internal control 
system. For federal entities, OMB Circular No. A-123 provides specific 
requirements on how to perform evaluations and report on internal control 
in the federal government. Nonfederal entities may refer to applicable 
laws and regulations as well as input from key external stakeholders 
when determining how to appropriately evaluate and report on internal 
control. 

 


Factors of Effective 
Internal Control 

OV3.02 An effective internal control system provides reasonable 
assurance that the organization will achieve its objectives. As stated in 
section 2 of the Overview, an effective internal control system has 

• each of the five components of internal control effectively designed, 
implemented, and operating and 
• the five components operating together in an integrated manner. 


 

OV3.03 To determine if an internal control system is effective, 
management assesses the design, implementation, and operating 
effectiveness of the five components and 17 principles. If a principle or 
component is not effective, or the components are not operating together 
in an integrated manner, then an internal control system cannot be 
effective. 

 

Evaluation of Internal 
Control 



OV3.04 In the federal government, FMFIA mandates that the head of 
each executive branch agency annually prepare a statement as to 
whether the agency’s systems of internal accounting and administrative 
controls comply with the requirements of the act. If the systems do not 
comply, the head of the agency will prepare a report in which any material 
weaknesses in the agency’s system of internal accounting and 
administrative control are identified and the plans and schedule for 
correcting any such weakness are described. OMB issues guidance for 
evaluating these requirements in OMB Circular No. A-123. Nonfederal 
entities may refer to applicable laws and regulations for guidance in 
preparing statements regarding internal control. 

Design and Implementation 

OV3.05 When evaluating design of internal control, management 
determines if controls individually and in combination with other controls 
are capable of achieving an objective and addressing related risks. When 
evaluating implementation, management determines if the control exists 
and if the entity has placed the control into operation. A control cannot be 
effectively implemented if it was not effectively designed. A deficiency in 
design exists when (1) a control necessary to meet a control objective is 
missing or (2) an existing control is not properly designed so that even if 
the control operates as designed, the control objective would not be met. 
A deficiency in implementation exists when a properly designed control is 
not implemented correctly in the internal control system. 


Operating Effectiveness 

OV3.06 In evaluating operating effectiveness, management determines if 
controls were applied at relevant times during the period under 
evaluation, the consistency with which they were applied, and by whom or 
by what means they were applied. If substantially different controls were 
used at different times during the period under evaluation, management 
evaluates operating effectiveness separately for each unique control 
system. A control cannot be effectively operating if it was not effectively 
designed and implemented. A deficiency in operation exists when a 
properly designed control does not operate as designed, or when the 
person performing the control does not possess the necessary authority 
or competence to perform the control effectively. 

Effect of Deficiencies on the Internal Control System 

OV3.07 Management evaluates control deficiencies identified by 
management’s ongoing monitoring of the internal control system as well 
as any separate evaluations performed by both internal and external 
sources. A deficiency in internal control exists when the design, 
implementation, or operation of a control does not allow management or 
personnel, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to 
achieve control objectives and address related risks. 

OV3.08 Management evaluates the significance of identified deficiencies. 
Significance refers to the relative importance of a deficiency to the entity’s 
achieving a defined objective. To evaluate the significance of the 
deficiency, management assesses its effect on achieving the defined 
objectives at both the entity and transaction level. Management evaluates 
the significance of a deficiency by considering the magnitude of impact, 
likelihood of occurrence, and nature of the deficiency. Magnitude of 
impact refers to the likely effect that the deficiency could have on the 
entity achieving its objectives and is affected by factors such as the size, 
pace, and duration of the deficiency’s impact. A deficiency may be more 
significant to one objective than another. Likelihood of occurrence refers 
to the possibility of a deficiency impacting an entity’s ability to achieve its 
objectives. The nature of the deficiency involves factors such as the 
degree of subjectivity involved with the deficiency and whether the 
deficiency arises from fraud or misconduct. The oversight body oversees 
management’s evaluation of the significance of deficiencies so that 
deficiencies have been properly considered. 


OV3.09 Deficiencies are evaluated both on an individual basis and in the 
aggregate. Management considers the correlation among different 
deficiencies or groups of deficiencies when evaluating their significance. 
Deficiency evaluation varies by entity because of differences in entities’ 
objectives. 

OV3.10 For each principle, management makes a summary 
determination as to whether the principle is designed, implemented, and 
operating effectively. Management considers the impact of deficiencies 
identified in achieving documentation requirements as part of this 
summary determination.5 Management may consider the related 
attributes as part of this summary determination. If a principle is not 
designed, implemented, or operating effectively, then the respective 
component cannot be effective. 

5See paras. OV4.08 through OV4.09 for further discussion of documentation 
requirements. 

OV3.11 Based on the results of the summary determination for each 
principle, management concludes on the design, implementation, and 
operating effectiveness of each of the five components of internal control. 
Management also considers if the five components operate together 
effectively. If one or more of the five components are not effectively 
designed, implemented, or operating effectively or if they are not 
operating together in an integrated manner, then an internal control 
system is ineffective. Judgment is used in making such determinations, 
which includes exercising reasonable care. 

 

Section 4 - Additional 
Considerations 



 

 

 

Service Organizations 



OV4.01 Management may engage external parties to perform certain 
operational processes for the entity, such as accounting and payroll 
processing, security services, or health care claims processing. For the 
purpose of the Green Book, these external parties are referred to as 
service organizations. Management, however, retains responsibility for 
the performance of processes assigned to service organizations. 


Therefore, management needs to understand the controls each service 
organization has designed, has implemented, and operates for the 
assigned operational process and how the service organization’s internal 
control system impacts the entity’s internal control system. 

OV4.02 If controls performed by the service organization are necessary 
for the entity to achieve its objectives and address risks related to the 
assigned operational process, the entity’s internal controls may include 
complementary user entity controls identified by the service organization 
or its auditors that are necessary to achieve the service organization’s 
control objectives. 

OV4.03 Management may consider the following when determining the 
extent of oversight for the operational processes assigned to the service 
organization: 

• The nature of services outsourced 
• The service organization’s standards of conduct 
• The quality and frequency of the service organization’s enforcement 
of adherence to standards of conduct by its personnel 
• The magnitude and level of complexity of the entity’s operations and 
organizational structure 
• The extent to which the entity’s internal controls are sufficient so that 
the entity achieves its objectives and addresses risks related to the 
assigned operational process 


 

Large versus Small 
Entities 



OV4.04 The 17 principles apply to both large and small entities. However, 
smaller entities may have different implementation approaches than 
larger entities. Smaller entities typically have unique advantages, which 
can contribute to an effective internal control system. These may include 
a higher level of involvement by management in operational processes 
and direct interaction with personnel. Smaller entities may find informal 
staff meetings effective for communicating quality information, whereas 
larger entities may need more formal mechanisms—such as written 
reports, intranet portals, or periodic formal meetings—to communicate 
with the organization. 

OV4.05 A smaller entity, however, faces greater challenges in 
segregating duties because of its concentration of responsibilities and 


Overview 

authorities in the organizational structure.6 Management, however, can 
respond to this increased risk through the design of the internal control 
system, such as by adding additional levels of review for key operational 
processes, reviewing randomly selected transactions and their supporting 
documentation, taking periodic asset counts, or checking supervisor 
reconciliations. 

Benefits and Costs of 
Internal Control 

OV4.06 Internal control provides many benefits to an entity. It provides 
management with added confidence regarding the achievement of 
objectives, provides feedback on how effectively an entity is operating, 
and helps reduce risks affecting the achievement of the entity’s 
objectives. Management considers a variety of cost factors in relation to 
expected benefits when designing and implementing internal controls. 
The complexity of cost-benefit determination is compounded by the 
interrelationship of controls with operational processes. Where controls 
are integrated with operational processes, it is difficult to isolate either 
their costs or benefits. 

OV4.07 Management may decide how an entity evaluates the costs 
versus benefits of various approaches to implementing an effective 
internal control system. However, cost alone is not an acceptable reason 
to avoid implementing internal controls. Management is responsible for 
meeting internal control objectives. The costs versus benefits 
considerations support management’s ability to effectively design, 
implement, and operate an internal control system that balances the 
allocation of resources in relation to the areas of greatest risk, complexity, 
or other factors relevant to achieving the entity’s objectives. 

Documentation 
Requirements 

OV4.08 Documentation is a necessary part of an effective internal control 
system. The level and nature of documentation vary based on the size of 
the entity and the complexity of the operational processes the entity 
performs. Management uses judgment in determining the extent of 
documentation that is needed. Documentation is required for the effective 
design, implementation, and operating effectiveness of an entity’s internal 
control system. The Green Book includes minimum documentation 
requirements as follows: 

6See paras. 10.12 through 10.14 for further discussion of segregation of duties. 

Page 19 GAO-14-704G Federal Internal Control Standards 


• If management determines that a principle is not relevant, 
management supports that determination with documentation that 
includes the rationale of how, in the absence of that principle, the 
associated component could be designed, implemented, and 
operated effectively. (paragraph OV2.06) 
• Management develops and maintains documentation of its internal 
control system. (paragraph 3.09) 
• Management documents in policies the internal control responsibilities 
of the organization. (paragraph 12.02) 
• Management evaluates and documents the results of ongoing 
monitoring and separate evaluations to identify internal control issues. 
(paragraph 16.09) 
• Management evaluates and documents internal control issues and 
determines appropriate corrective actions for internal control 
deficiencies on a timely basis. (paragraph 17.05) 
• Management completes and documents corrective actions to 
remediate internal control deficiencies on a timely basis. (paragraph 
17.06) 


 

OV4.09 These requirements represent the minimum level of 
documentation in an entity’s internal control system. Management 
exercises judgment in determining what additional documentation may be 
necessary for an effective internal control system. If management 
identifies deficiencies in achieving these documentation requirements, the 
effect of the identified deficiencies is considered as part of management’s 
summary determination as to whether the related principle is designed, 
implemented, and operating effectively. 

 

Use by Other Entities 



OV4.10 The Green Book may be applied as a framework for an internal 
control system for state, local, and quasi-governmental entities, as well as 
not-for-profit organizations. If management elects to adopt the Green 
Book as criteria, management follows all relevant requirements presented 
in these standards. 


Control Environment 

 

Overview 

The control environment is the foundation for an internal control system. It 
provides the discipline and structure, which affect the overall quality of 
internal control. It influences how objectives are defined and how control 
activities are structured. The oversight body and management establish 
and maintain an environment throughout the entity that sets a positive 
attitude toward internal control. 

Principles 

1. The oversight body and management should demonstrate a 
commitment to integrity and ethical values. 

2. The oversight body should oversee the entity’s internal control system. 

3. Management should establish an organizational structure, assign 
responsibility, and delegate authority to achieve the entity’s objectives. 

4. Management should demonstrate a commitment to recruit, develop, 
and retain competent individuals. 

5. Management should evaluate performance and hold individuals 
accountable for their internal control responsibilities. 

 


Principle 1 - 
Demonstrate 
Commitment to 
Integrity and Ethical 
Values 

1.01 The oversight body and management should demonstrate a 
commitment to integrity and ethical values. 

Attributes 

The following attributes contribute to the design, implementation, and 
operating effectiveness of this principle: 

• Tone at the Top 
• Standards of Conduct 
• Adherence to Standards of Conduct 


 

Tone at the Top 



1.02 The oversight body and management demonstrate the importance of 
integrity and ethical values through their directives, attitudes, and 
behavior. 

1.03 The oversight body and management lead by an example that 
demonstrates the organization’s values, philosophy, and operating style. 
The oversight body and management set the tone at the top and 
throughout the organization by their example, which is fundamental to an 
effective internal control system. In larger entities, the various layers of 
management in the organizational structure may also set “tone in the 
middle.” 

1.04 The oversight body’s and management’s directives, attitudes, and 
behaviors reflect the integrity and ethical values expected throughout the 
entity. The oversight body and management reinforce the commitment to 
doing what is right, not just maintaining a minimum level of performance 
necessary to comply with applicable laws and regulations, so that these 
priorities are understood by all stakeholders, such as regulators, 
employees, and the general public. 

1.05 Tone at the top can be either a driver, as shown in the preceding 
paragraphs, or a barrier to internal control. Without a strong tone at the 
top to support an internal control system, the entity’s risk identification 
may be incomplete, risk responses may be inappropriate, control 
activities may not be appropriately designed or implemented, information 
and communication may falter, and results of monitoring may not be 
understood or acted upon to remediate deficiencies. 

 

 


Standards of Conduct 

1.06 Management establishes standards of conduct to communicate 
expectations concerning integrity and ethical values. The entity uses 
ethical values to balance the needs and concerns of different 
stakeholders, such as regulators, employees, and the general public. The 
standards of conduct guide the directives, attitudes, and behaviors of the 
organization in achieving the entity’s objectives. 

1.07 Management, with oversight from the oversight body, defines the 
organization’s expectations of ethical values in the standards of conduct. 
Management may consider using policies, operating principles, or 
guidelines to communicate the standards of conduct to the organization. 

 

Adherence to Standards of 
Conduct 



1.08 Management establishes processes to evaluate performance 
against the entity’s expected standards of conduct and address any 
deviations in a timely manner. 

1.09 Management uses established standards of conduct as the basis for 
evaluating adherence to integrity and ethical values across the 
organization. Management evaluates the adherence to standards of 
conduct across all levels of the entity. To gain assurance that the entity’s 
standards of conduct are implemented effectively, management evaluates 
the directives, attitudes, and behaviors of individuals and teams. 
Evaluations may consist of ongoing monitoring or separate evaluations.7 
Individual personnel can also report issues through reporting lines, such 
as regular staff meetings, upward feedback processes, a whistle-blowing 
program, or an ethics hotline.8 The oversight body evaluates 
management’s adherence to the standards of conduct as well as the 
overall adherence by the entity. 

7See paras. 16.04 through 16.08 for further discussion of ongoing monitoring and 
separate evaluations. 

8See para. 14.06 for further discussion of upward and separate reporting lines. 

1.10 Management determines the tolerance level for deviations. 
Management may determine that the entity will have zero tolerance for 
deviations from certain expected standards of conduct, while deviations 
from others may be addressed with warnings to personnel. Management 
establishes a process for evaluations of individual and team adherence to 
standards of conduct that escalates and remediates deviations. 


Management addresses deviations from expected standards of conduct 
timely and consistently. Depending on the severity of the deviation 
determined through the evaluation process, management, with oversight 
from the oversight body, takes appropriate actions and may also need to 
consider applicable laws and regulations. The standards of conduct to 
which management holds personnel, however, remain consistent. 

 

Principle 2 - Exercise 
Oversight 
Responsibility 



2.01 The oversight body should oversee the entity’s internal control 
system. 

Attributes 

The following attributes contribute to the design, implementation, and 
operating effectiveness of this principle: 

• Oversight Structure 
• Oversight for the Internal Control System 
• Input for Remediation of Deficiencies 


 

Oversight Structure 



2.02 The entity determines an oversight structure to fulfill responsibilities 
set forth by applicable laws and regulations, relevant government 
guidance, and feedback from key stakeholders. The entity will select, or if 
mandated by law will have selected for it, an oversight body. When the 
oversight body is composed of entity management, activities referenced 
in the Green Book as performed by “management” exclude these 
members of management when in their roles as the oversight body. 

Responsibilities of an Oversight Body 

2.03 When the oversight structure of an entity is led by senior 
management, senior management may distinguish itself from divisional or 
functional management through the establishment of an oversight body. 
An oversight body oversees the entity’s operations; provides constructive 
criticism to management; and where appropriate, makes oversight 
decisions so that the entity achieves its objectives in alignment with the 
entity’s integrity and ethical values. 

Qualifications for an Oversight Body 

2.04 In selecting members for an oversight body, the entity or applicable 
body defines the entity knowledge, relevant expertise, number of 


members, and possible independence needed to fulfill the oversight 
responsibilities for the entity. 

2.05 Members of an oversight body understand the entity’s objectives, its 
related risks, and expectations of its stakeholders. In addition to an 
oversight body, an organization within the federal government may have 
several bodies that are key stakeholders for the entity, such as the White 
House, Congress, the Office of Management and Budget, and the 
Department of the Treasury. An oversight body works with key 
stakeholders to understand their expectations and help the entity fulfill 
these expectations if appropriate. 

2.06 The entity or applicable body also considers the expertise needed by 
members to oversee, question, and evaluate management. Capabilities 
expected of all members of an oversight body include integrity and ethical 
values, leadership, critical thinking, and problem-solving abilities. 

2.07 Further, in determining the number of members of an oversight 
body, the entity or applicable body considers the need for members of the 
oversight body to have specialized skills to enable discussion, offer 
constructive criticism to management, and make appropriate oversight 
decisions. Some specialized skills may include the following: 

• Internal control mindset (e.g., professional skepticism and 
perspectives on approaches for identifying and responding to risks 
and assessing the effectiveness of the system of internal control) 
• Programmatic expertise, including knowledge of the entity’s mission, 
programs, and operational processes (e.g., procurement, human 
capital, and functional management expertise) 
• Financial expertise, including financial reporting (e.g., accounting 
standards and financial reporting requirements and budgetary 
expertise) 
• Relevant systems and technology (e.g., understanding critical 
systems and technology risks and opportunities) 
• Legal and regulatory expertise (e.g., understanding of applicable laws 
and regulations) 


2.08 If authorized by applicable laws and regulations, the entity may also 
consider including independent members as part of an oversight body.9 

9See GAO, Government Auditing Standards: 2011 Revision, GAO-12-331G (Washington, 
D.C.: December 2011), para. 3.03, for further discussion of independence. 


Members of an oversight body scrutinize and question management’s 
activities, present alternative views, and act when faced with obvious or 
suspected wrongdoing. Independent members with relevant expertise 
provide value through their impartial evaluation of the entity and its 
operations in achieving objectives. 


Oversight for the Internal 
Control System 



2.09 The oversight body oversees management’s design, 
implementation, and operation of the entity’s internal control system. The 
oversight body’s responsibilities for the entity’s internal control system 
include the following: 

• Control Environment - Establish integrity and ethical values, 
establish oversight structure, develop expectations of competence, 
and maintain accountability to all members of the oversight body and 
key stakeholders. 
• Risk Assessment - Oversee management’s assessment of risks to 
the achievement of objectives, including the potential impact of 
significant changes, fraud, and management override of internal 
control. 
• Control Activities - Provide oversight to management in the 
development and performance of control activities. 
• Information and Communication - Analyze and discuss information 
relating to the entity’s achievement of objectives. 
• Monitoring - Scrutinize the nature and scope of management’s 
monitoring activities as well as management’s evaluation and 
remediation of identified deficiencies. 


 

2.10 These responsibilities are supported by the organizational structure 
that management establishes.10 The oversight body oversees 
management’s design, implementation, and operation of the entity’s 
organizational structure so that the processes necessary to enable the 
oversight body to fulfill its responsibilities exist and are operating 
effectively. 

10See paras. 3.02 through 3.05 for further discussion of organizational structure. 

 


Input for Remediation of 
Deficiencies 

2.11 The oversight body provides input to management’s plans for 
remediation of deficiencies in the internal control system as appropriate. 

2.12 Management reports deficiencies identified in the internal control 
system to the oversight body. The oversight body oversees and provides 
direction to management on the remediation of these deficiencies. The 
oversight body also provides direction when a deficiency crosses 
organizational boundaries or units, or when the interests of management 
may conflict with remediation efforts. When appropriate and authorized, 
the oversight body may direct the creation of teams to address or oversee 
specific matters critical to achieving the entity’s objectives. 

2.13 The oversight body is responsible for overseeing the remediation of 
deficiencies as appropriate and for providing direction to management on 
appropriate time frames for correcting these deficiencies.11 

11See para. 17.06 for further discussion of timely remediation of findings. 

 

Principle 3 - Establish 
Structure, 
Responsibility, and 
Authority 



3.01 Management should establish an organizational structure, assign 
responsibility, and delegate authority to achieve the entity’s objectives. 

Attributes 

The following attributes contribute to the design, implementation, and 
operating effectiveness of this principle: 

• Organizational Structure 
• Assignment of Responsibility and Delegation of Authority 
• Documentation of the Internal Control System 


 

Organizational Structure 



3.02 Management establishes the organizational structure necessary to 
enable the entity to plan, execute, control, and assess the organization in 
achieving its objectives. Management develops the overall responsibilities 
from the entity’s objectives that enable the entity to achieve its objectives 
and address related risks. 

3.03 Management develops an organizational structure with an 
understanding of the overall responsibilities, and assigns these 
responsibilities to discrete units to enable the organization to operate in 


Control Environment 

an efficient and effective manner, comply with applicable laws and 
regulations, and reliably report quality information.12 Based on the nature 
of the assigned responsibility, management chooses the type and number 
of discrete units, such as divisions, offices, and related subunits. 

3.04 As part of establishing an organizational structure, management 
considers how units interact in order to fulfill their overall responsibilities. 
Management establishes reporting lines within an organizational structure 
so that units can communicate the quality information necessary for each 
unit to fulfill its overall responsibilities.13 Reporting lines are defined at all 
levels of the organization and provide methods of communication that can 
flow down, across, up, and around the structure.14 Management also 
considers the entity’s overall responsibilities to external stakeholders and 
establishes reporting lines that allow the entity to both communicate and 
receive information from external stakeholders.15 
3.05 Management periodically evaluates the organizational structure so 
that it meets the entity’s objectives and has adapted to any new 
objectives for the entity, such as a new law or regulation. 
Assignment of 
Responsibility and 
Delegation of Authority 

3.06 To achieve the entity’s objectives, management assigns 
responsibility and delegates authority to key roles throughout the entity. A 
key role is a position in the organizational structure that is assigned an 
overall responsibility of the entity. Generally, key roles relate to senior 
management positions within an entity. 
3.07 Management considers the overall responsibilities assigned to each 
unit, determines what key roles are needed to fulfill the assigned 
responsibilities, and establishes the key roles. Those in key roles can 
further assign responsibility for internal control to roles below them in the 
organizational structure, but retain ownership for fulfilling the overall 
responsibilities assigned to the unit. 
12See paras. 13.05 through 13.06 for further discussion of quality information. 
13See paras. 13.02 through 13.06 for further discussion of the use of quality information. 
14See paras. 14.02 through 14.06 for further discussion of internal reporting lines. 
15See paras. 15.02 through 15.06 for further discussion of external reporting lines. 

Page 28 GAO-14-704G Federal Internal Control Standards 


Control Environment 

3.08 Management determines what level of authority each key role needs 
to fulfill a responsibility. Management delegates authority only to the 
extent required to achieve the entity’s objectives. As part of delegating 
authority, management evaluates the delegation for proper segregation of 
duties within the unit and in the organizational structure. Segregation of 
duties helps prevent fraud, waste, and abuse in the entity by considering 
the need to separate authority, custody, and accounting in the 
organizational structure.16 As with assigning responsibility, those in key 
roles can delegate their authority for internal control to roles below them 
in the organizational structure. 
Documentation of the 
Internal Control System 

3.09 Management develops and maintains documentation of its internal 
control system. 
3.10 Effective documentation assists in management’s design of internal 
control by establishing and communicating the who, what, when, where, 
and why of internal control execution to personnel. Documentation also 
provides a means to retain organizational knowledge and mitigate the risk 
of having that knowledge limited to a few personnel, as well as a means 
to communicate that knowledge as needed to external parties, such as 
external auditors. 
3.11 Management documents internal control to meet operational needs. 
Documentation of controls, including changes to controls, is evidence that 
controls are identified, capable of being communicated to those 
responsible for their performance, and capable of being monitored and 
evaluated by the entity. 
3.12 The extent of documentation needed to support the design, 
implementation, and operating effectiveness of the five components of 
internal control is a matter of judgment for management. Management 
considers the cost benefit of documentation requirements for the entity as 
well as the size, nature, and complexity of the entity and its objectives. 
Some level of documentation, however, is necessary so that the 
components of internal control can be designed, implemented, and 
operating effectively. 
16See paras. 10.12 through 10.14 for further discussion of segregation of duties. 

Page 29 GAO-14-704G Federal Internal Control Standards 


Principle 4 - 
Demonstrate 
Commitment to 
Competence 



4.01 Management should demonstrate a commitment to recruit, develop, 
and retain competent individuals. 

Attributes 

The following attributes contribute to the design, implementation, and 
operating effectiveness of this principle: 

• Expectations of Competence 
• Recruitment, Development, and Retention of Individuals 
• Succession and Contingency Plans and Preparation 


 

Expectations of 
Competence 



4.02 Management establishes expectations of competence for key roles, 
and other roles at management’s discretion, to help the entity achieve its 
objectives. Competence is the qualification to carry out assigned 
responsibilities. It requires relevant knowledge, skills, and abilities, which 
are gained largely from professional experience, training, and 
certifications. It is demonstrated by the behavior of individuals as they 
carry out their responsibilities. 

4.03 Management considers standards of conduct, assigned 
responsibility, and delegated authority when establishing expectations. 
Management establishes expectations of competence for key roles. 
Management may also establish expectations of competence for all 
personnel through policies within the entity’s internal control system.17 

17See paras. 12.02 through 12.04 for further discussion of policies. 

4.04 Personnel need to possess and maintain a level of competence that 
allows them to accomplish their assigned responsibilities, as well as 
understand the importance of effective internal control. Holding 
individuals accountable to established policies by evaluating personnel’s 
competence is integral to attracting, developing, and retaining individuals. 
Management evaluates competence of personnel across the entity in 
relation to established policies. Management acts as necessary to 
address any deviations from the established policies. The oversight body 
evaluates the competence of management as well as the competence 
overall of entity personnel. 

 


Recruitment, 
Development, and 
Retention of Individuals 

4.05 Management recruits, develops, and retains competent personnel to 
achieve the entity’s objectives. Management considers the following: 

• Recruit - Conduct procedures to determine whether a particular 
candidate fits the organizational needs and has the competence for 
the proposed role. 
• Train - Enable individuals to develop competencies appropriate for 
key roles, reinforce standards of conduct, and tailor training based on 
the needs of the role. 
• Mentor - Provide guidance on the individual’s performance based on 
standards of conduct and expectations of competence, align the 
individual’s skills and expertise with the entity’s objectives, and help 
personnel adapt to an evolving environment. 
• Retain - Provide incentives to motivate and reinforce expected levels 
of performance and desired conduct, including training and 
credentialing as appropriate. 


 

Succession and 
Contingency Plans and 
Preparation 



4.06 Management defines succession and contingency plans for key 
roles to help the entity continue achieving its objectives. Succession plans 
address the entity’s need to replace competent personnel over the long 
term, whereas contingency plans address the entity’s need to respond to 
sudden personnel changes that could compromise the internal control 
system. 

4.07 Management defines succession plans for key roles, chooses 
succession candidates, and trains succession candidates to assume the 
key roles. If management relies on a service organization to fulfill the 
assigned responsibilities of key roles in the entity, management assesses 
whether the service organization can continue in these key roles, 
identifies other candidate organizations for the roles, and implements 
processes to enable knowledge sharing with the succession candidate 
organization. 

4.08 Management defines contingency plans for assigning responsibilities 
if a key role in the entity is vacated without advance notice. The 
importance of the key role in the internal control system and the impact to 
the entity of its vacancy dictates the formality and depth of the 
contingency plan. 

 


Principle 5 - Enforce 
Accountability 

5.01 Management should evaluate performance and hold individuals 
accountable for their internal control responsibilities. 

Attributes 

The following attributes contribute to the design, implementation, and 
operating effectiveness of this principle: 

• Enforcement of Accountability 
• Consideration of Excessive Pressures 


 

Enforcement of 
Accountability 



5.02 Management enforces accountability of individuals performing their 
internal control responsibilities. Accountability is driven by the tone at the 
top and supported by the commitment to integrity and ethical values, 
organizational structure, and expectations of competence, which 
influence the control culture of the entity. Accountability for performance 
of internal control responsibility supports day-to-day decision making, 
attitudes, and behaviors. Management holds personnel accountable 
through mechanisms such as performance appraisals and disciplinary 
actions. 

5.03 Management holds entity personnel accountable for performing their 
assigned internal control responsibilities. The oversight body, in turn, 
holds management accountable as well as the organization as a whole 
for its internal control responsibilities. 

5.04 If management establishes incentives, management recognizes that 
such actions can yield unintended consequences and evaluates 
incentives so that they align with the entity’s standards of conduct. 

5.05 Management holds service organizations accountable for their 
assigned internal control responsibilities. Management may contract with 
service organizations to perform roles in the organizational structure. 
Management communicates to the service organization the objectives of 
the entity and their related risks, the entity’s standards of conduct, the role 
of the service organization in the organizational structure, the assigned 
responsibilities and authorities of the role, and the expectations of 
competence for its role that will enable the service organization to perform 
its internal control responsibilities. 

5.06 Management, with oversight from the oversight body, takes 
corrective action as necessary to enforce accountability for internal 


Control Environment 

control in the entity. These actions can range from informal feedback 
provided by the direct supervisor to disciplinary action taken by the 
oversight body, depending on the significance of the deficiency to the 
internal control system.18 

Consideration of 
Excessive Pressures 

5.07 Management adjusts excessive pressures on personnel in the entity. 
Pressure can appear in an entity because of goals established by 
management to meet objectives or cyclical demands of various processes 
performed by the entity, such as year-end financial statement preparation. 
Excessive pressure can result in personnel “cutting corners” to meet the 
established goals. 
5.08 Management is responsible for evaluating pressure on personnel to 
help personnel fulfill their assigned responsibilities in accordance with the 
entity’s standards of conduct. Management can adjust excessive 
pressures using many different tools, such as rebalancing workloads or 
increasing resource levels. 
18See OV3.08 for further discussion of significance of deficiencies. 

Page 33 GAO-14-704G Federal Internal Control Standards 


Risk Assessment 

 

Overview 

Having established an effective control environment, management 
assesses the risks facing the entity as it seeks to achieve its objectives. 
This assessment provides the basis for developing appropriate risk 
responses. Management assesses the risks the entity faces from both 
external and internal sources. 

Principles 

6. Management should define objectives clearly to enable the 
identification of risks and define risk tolerances. 

7. Management should identify, analyze, and respond to risks related to 
achieving the defined objectives. 

8. Management should consider the potential for fraud when identifying, 
analyzing, and responding to risks. 

9. Management should identify, analyze, and respond to significant 
changes that could impact the internal control system. 

 

 


Principle 6 - Define 
Objectives and Risk 
Tolerances 



6.01 Management should define objectives clearly to enable the 
identification of risks and define risk tolerances. 

Attributes 

The following attributes contribute to the design, implementation, and 
operating effectiveness of this principle: 

• Definitions of Objectives 
• Definitions of Risk Tolerances 


 

Definitions of Objectives 



6.02 Management defines objectives in specific and measurable terms to 
enable the design of internal control for related risks. Specific terms are 
fully and clearly set forth so they can be easily understood. Measurable 
terms allow for the assessment of performance toward achieving 
objectives. Objectives are initially set as part of the objective-setting 
process and then refined as they are incorporated into the internal control 
system when management uses them to establish the control 
environment. 

6.03 Management defines objectives in specific terms so they are 
understood at all levels of the entity. This involves clearly defining what is 
to be achieved, who is to achieve it, how it will be achieved, and the time 
frames for achievement. All objectives can be broadly classified into one 
or more of three categories: operations, reporting, or compliance. 
Reporting objectives are further categorized as being either internal or 
external and financial or nonfinancial. Management defines objectives in 
alignment with the organization’s mission, strategic plan, and 
performance goals. 

6.04 Management defines objectives in measurable terms so that 
performance toward achieving those objectives can be assessed. 
Measurable objectives are generally free of bias and do not require 
subjective judgments to dominate their measurement. Measurable 
objectives are also stated in a quantitative or qualitative form that permits 
reasonably consistent measurement. 

6.05 Management considers external requirements and internal 
expectations when defining objectives to enable the design of internal 
control. Legislators, regulators, and standard-setting bodies set external 
requirements by establishing the laws, regulations, and standards with 
which the entity is required to comply. Management identifies, 


Risk Assessment 

understands, and incorporates these requirements into the entity’s 
objectives. Management sets internal expectations and requirements 
through the established standards of conduct,19 oversight structure,20 
organizational structure,21 and expectations of competence22 as part of 
the control environment. 

6.06 Management evaluates and, if necessary, revises defined objectives 
so that they are consistent with these requirements and expectations. 
This consistency enables management to identify and analyze risks 
associated with achieving the defined objectives. 
6.07 Management determines whether performance measures for the 
defined objectives are appropriate for evaluating the entity’s performance 
in achieving those objectives. For quantitative objectives, performance 
measures may be a targeted percentage or numerical value. For 
qualitative objectives, management may need to design performance 
measures that indicate a level or degree of performance, such as 
milestones. 
Definitions of Risk 
Tolerances 

6.08 Management defines risk tolerances for the defined objectives. Risk 
tolerance is the acceptable level of variation in performance relative to the 
achievement of objectives. Risk tolerances are initially set as part of the 
objective-setting process. Management defines the risk tolerances for 
defined objectives by ensuring that the set levels of variation for 
performance measures are appropriate for the design of an internal 
control system. 
6.09 Management defines risk tolerances in specific and measurable 
terms so they are clearly stated and can be measured. Risk tolerance is 
often measured in the same terms as the performance measures for the 
defined objectives. Depending on the category of objectives, risk 
tolerances may be expressed as follows: 
19See paras. 1.06 through 1.07 for further discussion of standards of conduct. 
20See paras. 2.02 through 2.08 for further discussion of oversight structure. 
21See paras. 3.02 through 3.05 for further discussion of organizational structure. 
22See paras. 4.02 through 4.04 for further discussion of expectations of competence. 

Page 36 GAO-14-704G Federal Internal Control Standards 


• Operations objectives - Level of variation in performance in relation 
to risk. 
• Nonfinancial reporting objectives - Level of precision and accuracy 
suitable for user needs, involving both qualitative and quantitative 
considerations to meet the needs of the nonfinancial report user. 
• Financial reporting objectives - Judgments about materiality are 
made in light of surrounding circumstances, involve both qualitative 
and quantitative considerations, and are affected by the needs of 
financial report users and size or nature of a misstatement. 
• Compliance objectives - Concept of risk tolerance does not apply. 
An entity is either compliant or not compliant. 


 

6.10 Management also evaluates whether risk tolerances enable the 
appropriate design of internal control by considering whether they are 
consistent with requirements and expectations for the defined objectives. 
As in defining objectives, management considers the risk tolerances in 
the context of the entity’s applicable laws, regulations, and standards as 
well as the entity’s standards of conduct, oversight structure, 
organizational structure, and expectations of competence. If risk 
tolerances for defined objectives are not consistent with these 
requirements and expectations, management revises the risk tolerances 
to achieve consistency. 

 

Principle 7 - Identify, 
Analyze, and 
Respond to Risks 



7.01 Management should identify, analyze, and respond to risks related 
to achieving the defined objectives. 

Attributes 

The following attributes contribute to the design, implementation, and 
operating effectiveness of this principle: 

• Identification of Risks 
• Analysis of Risks 
• Response to Risks 


 

Identification of Risks 



7.02 Management identifies risks throughout the entity to provide a basis 
for analyzing risks. Risk assessment is the identification and analysis of 
risks related to achieving the defined objectives to form a basis for 
designing risk responses. 


7.03 To identify risks, management considers the types of risks that 
impact the entity. This includes both inherent and residual risk. Inherent 
risk is the risk to an entity in the absence of management’s response to 
the risk. Residual risk is the risk that remains after management’s 
response to inherent risk. Management’s lack of response to either risk 
could cause deficiencies in the internal control system. 

7.04 Management considers all significant interactions within the entity 
and with external parties, changes within the entity’s internal and external 
environment,23 and other internal and external factors to identify risks 
throughout the entity. Internal risk factors may include the complex nature 
of an entity’s programs, its organizational structure, or the use of new 
technology in operational processes. External risk factors may include 
new or amended laws, regulations, or professional standards; economic 
instability; or potential natural disasters. Management considers these 
factors at both the entity and transaction levels to comprehensively 
identify risks that affect defined objectives.24 Risk identification methods 
may include qualitative and quantitative ranking activities, forecasting and 
strategic planning, and consideration of deficiencies identified through 
audits and other assessments. 

23See paras. 9.02 through 9.03 for further discussion of changes in the internal control 
system. 

24See paras. 10.07 through 10.11 for further discussion of level of controls. 

 

Analysis of Risks 



7.05 Management analyzes the identified risks to estimate their 
significance, which provides a basis for responding to the risks. 
Significance refers to the effect on achieving a defined objective. 

7.06 Management estimates the significance of the identified risks to 
assess their effect on achieving the defined objectives at both the entity 
and transaction levels. Management estimates the significance of a risk 
by considering the magnitude of impact, likelihood of occurrence, and 
nature of the risk. Magnitude of impact refers to the likely magnitude of 
deficiency that could result from the risk and is affected by factors such as 
the size, pace, and duration of the risk’s impact. Likelihood of occurrence 
refers to the level of possibility that a risk will occur. The nature of the risk 
involves factors such as the degree of subjectivity involved with the risk 
and whether the risk arises from fraud or from complex or unusual 


transactions. The oversight body may oversee management’s estimates 
of significance so that risk tolerances have been properly defined. 

7.07 Risks may be analyzed on an individual basis or grouped into 
categories with related risks and analyzed collectively. Regardless of 
whether risks are analyzed individually or collectively, management 
considers the correlation among different risks or groups of risks when 
estimating their significance. The specific risk analysis methodology used 
can vary by entity because of differences in entities’ missions and the 
difficulty in qualitatively and quantitatively defining risk tolerances. 

 

Response to Risks 



7.08 Management designs responses to the analyzed risks so that risks 
are within the defined risk tolerance for the defined objective. 
Management designs overall risk responses for the analyzed risks based 
on the significance of the risk and defined risk tolerance. These risk 
responses may include the following: 

• Acceptance - No action is taken to respond to the risk based on the 
insignificance of the risk. 
• Avoidance - Action is taken to stop the operational process or the 
part of the operational process causing the risk. 
• Reduction - Action is taken to reduce the likelihood or magnitude of 
the risk. 
• Sharing - Action is taken to transfer or share risks across the entity or 
with external parties, such as insuring against losses. 


 

7.09 Based on the selected risk response, management designs the 
specific actions to respond to the analyzed risks. The nature and extent of 
risk response actions depend on the defined risk tolerance. Operating 
within the defined risk tolerance provides greater assurance that the entity 
will achieve its objectives. Performance measures are used to assess 
whether risk response actions enable the entity to operate within the 
defined risk tolerances. When risk response actions do not enable the 
entity to operate within the defined risk tolerances, management may 
need to revise risk responses or reconsider defined risk tolerances. 
Management may need to conduct periodic risk assessments to evaluate 
the effectiveness of the risk response actions. 

 


Principle 8 - Assess 
Fraud Risk 

8.01 Management should consider the potential for fraud when 
identifying, analyzing, and responding to risks. 

Attributes 

The following attributes contribute to the design, implementation, and 
operating effectiveness of this principle: 

• Types of Fraud 
• Fraud Risk Factors 
• Response to Fraud Risks 


 

Types of Fraud 



8.02 Management considers the types of fraud that can occur within the 
entity to provide a basis for identifying fraud risks.25 Types of fraud are as 
follows: 

25Fraud involves obtaining something of value through willful misrepresentation. Whether 
an act is in fact fraud is a determination to be made through the judicial or other 
adjudicative system and is beyond management’s professional responsibility for assessing 
risk. 

• Fraudulent financial reporting - Intentional misstatements or 
omissions of amounts or disclosures in financial statements to 
deceive financial statement users. This could include intentional 
alteration of accounting records, misrepresentation of transactions, or 
intentional misapplication of accounting principles. 
• Misappropriation of assets - Theft of an entity’s assets. This could 
include theft of property, embezzlement of receipts, or fraudulent 
payments. 
• Corruption - Bribery and other illegal acts. 


 

8.03 In addition to fraud, management considers other forms of 
misconduct that can occur, such as waste and abuse. Waste is the act of 
using or expending resources carelessly, extravagantly, or to no purpose. 
Abuse involves behavior that is deficient or improper when compared with 
behavior that a prudent person would consider reasonable and necessary 
operational practice given the facts and circumstances. This includes the 
misuse of authority or position for personal gain or for the benefit of 
another. Waste and abuse do not necessarily involve fraud or illegal acts. 


However, they may be an indication of potential fraud or illegal acts and 
may still impact the achievement of defined objectives. 

 

Fraud Risk Factors 



8.04 Management considers fraud risk factors. Fraud risk factors do not 
necessarily indicate that fraud exists but are often present when fraud 
occurs. Fraud risk factors include the following: 

• Incentive/pressure - Management or other personnel have an 
incentive or are under pressure, which provides a motive to commit 
fraud.26 
• Opportunity - Circumstances exist, such as the absence of controls, 
ineffective controls, or the ability of management to override controls, 
that provide an opportunity to commit fraud. 
• Attitude/rationalization - Individuals involved are able to rationalize 
committing fraud. Some individuals possess an attitude, character, or 
ethical values that allow them to knowingly and intentionally commit a 
dishonest act. 


26See paras. 5.07 through 5.08 for further discussion of pressure. 

27See paras. 7.05 through 7.07 for further discussion of analyzing risks. 

28See para. 10.13 for further discussion of management override. 

 

8.05 Management uses the fraud risk factors to identify fraud risks. While 
fraud risk may be greatest when all three risk factors are present, one or 
more of these factors may indicate a fraud risk. Other information 
provided by internal and external parties can also be used to identify 
fraud risks. This may include allegations of fraud or suspected fraud 
reported by the office of the inspector general or internal auditors, 
personnel, or external parties that interact with the entity. 

 

Response to Fraud Risks 



8.06 Management analyzes and responds to identified fraud risks so that 
they are effectively mitigated. Fraud risks are analyzed through the same 
risk analysis process performed for all identified risks.27 Management 
analyzes the identified fraud risks by estimating their significance, both 
individually and in the aggregate, to assess their effect on achieving the 
defined objectives. As part of analyzing fraud risk, management also 
assesses the risk of management override of controls.28 The oversight 


body oversees management’s assessments of fraud risk and the risk of 
management override of controls so that they are appropriate. 

8.07 Management responds to fraud risks through the same risk 
response process performed for all analyzed risks.29 Management 
designs an overall risk response and specific actions for responding to 
fraud risks. It may be possible to reduce or eliminate certain fraud risks by 
making changes to the entity’s activities and processes. These changes 
may include stopping or reorganizing certain operations and reallocating 
roles among personnel to enhance segregation of duties. In addition to 
responding to fraud risks, management may need to develop further 
responses to address the risk of management override of controls. 
Further, when fraud has been detected, the risk assessment process may 
need to be revised. 

29See paras. 7.08 through 7.09 for further discussion of responding to risks. 

 

Principle 9 - Identify, 
Analyze, and 
Respond to Change 



9.01 Management should identify, analyze, and respond to significant 
changes that could impact the internal control system. 

Attributes 

The following attributes contribute to the design, implementation, and 
operating effectiveness of this principle: 

• Identification of Change 
• Analysis of and Response to Change 


 

Identification of Change 



9.02 As part of risk assessment or a similar process, management 
identifies changes that could significantly impact the entity’s internal 
control system. Identifying, analyzing, and responding to change is similar 
to, if not part of, the entity’s regular risk assessment process. However, 
change is discussed separately because it is critical to an effective 
internal control system and can often be overlooked or inadequately 
addressed in the normal course of operations. 

9.03 Conditions affecting the entity and its environment continually 
change. Management can anticipate and plan for significant changes by 
using a forward-looking process for identifying change. Management 


Risk Assessment 

identifies, on a timely basis, significant changes to internal and external 
conditions that have already occurred or are expected to occur. Changes 
in internal conditions include changes to the entity’s programs or 
activities, oversight structure, organizational structure, personnel, and 
technology. Changes in external conditions include changes in the 
governmental, economic, technological, legal, regulatory, and physical 
environments. Identified significant changes are communicated across 
the entity through established reporting lines to appropriate personnel.30 

Analysis of and Response 
to Change 

9.04 As part of risk assessment or a similar process, management 
analyzes and responds to identified changes and related risks in order to 
maintain an effective internal control system. Changes in conditions 
affecting the entity and its environment often require changes to the 
entity’s internal control system, as existing controls may not be effective 
for meeting objectives or addressing risks under changed conditions. 
Management analyzes the effect of identified changes on the internal 
control system and responds by revising the internal control system on a 
timely basis, when necessary, to maintain its effectiveness. 
9.05 Further, changing conditions often prompt new risks or changes to 
existing risks that need to be assessed. As part of analyzing and 
responding to change, management performs a risk assessment to 
identify, analyze, and respond to any new risks prompted by the changes. 
Additionally, existing risks may require further assessment to determine 
whether the defined risk tolerances and risk responses need to be 
revised. 
30See paras. 14.02 through 14.06 for further discussion of internal reporting lines. 

Page 43 GAO-14-704G Federal Internal Control Standards 


Control Activities 

 

Overview 

Control activities are the actions management establishes through 
policies and procedures to achieve objectives and respond to risks in the 
internal control system, which includes the entity’s information system. 

Principles 

10. Management should design control activities to achieve objectives 
and respond to risks. 

11. Management should design the entity’s information system and 
related control activities to achieve objectives and respond to risks. 

12. Management should implement control activities through policies. 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Principle 10 - Design 
Control Activities 

10.01 Management should design control activities to achieve objectives 
and respond to risks. 

Attributes 

The following attributes contribute to the design, implementation, and 
operating effectiveness of this principle: 

• Response to Objectives and Risks 
• Design of Appropriate Types of Control Activities 
• Design of Control Activities at Various Levels 
• Segregation of Duties 


 

Response to Objectives 
and Risks 



10.02 Management designs control activities in response to the entity’s 
objectives and risks to achieve an effective internal control system. 
Control activities are the policies, procedures, techniques, and 
mechanisms that enforce management’s directives to achieve the entity’s 
objectives and address related risks. As part of the control environment 
component, management defines responsibilities, assigns them to key 
roles, and delegates authority to achieve the entity’s objectives. As part of 
the risk assessment component, management identifies the risks related 
to the entity and its objectives, including its service organizations; the 
entity’s risk tolerance; and risk responses. Management designs control 
activities to fulfill defined responsibilities and address identified risk 
responses. 

 

Design of Appropriate 
Types of Control Activities 



10.03 Management designs appropriate types of control activities for the 
entity’s internal control system. Control activities help management fulfill 
responsibilities and address identified risk responses in the internal 
control system. The common control activity categories listed in figure 6 
are meant only to illustrate the range and variety of control activities that 
may be useful to management. The list is not all inclusive and may not 
include particular control activities that an entity may need. 


Figure 6: Examples of Common Categories of Control Activities 

 

 

Top-level reviews of actual performance 

Management tracks major entity achievements and compares these to 
the plans, goals, and objectives set by the entity. 

Reviews by management at the functional or activity level 

Management compares actual performance to planned or expected 
results throughout the organization and analyzes significant differences. 

Management of human capital 

Effective management of an entity’s workforce, its human capital, is 
essential to achieving results and an important part of internal control. 
Only when the right personnel for the job are on board and are provided 
the right training, tools, structure, incentives, and responsibilities is 
operational success possible. Management continually assesses the 
knowledge, skills, and ability needs of the entity so that the entity is able 
to obtain a workforce that has the required knowledge, skills, and abilities 
to achieve organizational goals. Training is aimed at developing and 
retaining employee knowledge, skills, and abilities to meet changing 
organizational needs. Management provides qualified and continuous 
supervision so that internal control objectives are achieved. Management 
designs a performance evaluation and feedback system, supplemented 
by an effective rewards system, to help employees understand the 
connection between their performance and the entity’s success. As part 


of its human capital planning, management also considers how best to 
retain valuable employees, plan for their eventual departure, and maintain 
a continuity of needed skills and abilities. 

Controls over information processing 

A variety of control activities are used in information processing. 
Examples include edit checks of data entered; accounting for transactions 
in numerical sequences; comparing file totals with control accounts; and 
controlling access to data, files, and programs.31 

31See paras. 11.02 through 11.17 for further discussion of controls over information 
processing. 

Physical control over vulnerable assets 

Management establishes physical control to secure and safeguard 
vulnerable assets. Examples include security for and limited access to 
assets such as cash, securities, inventories, and equipment that might be 
vulnerable to risk of loss or unauthorized use. Management periodically 
counts and compares such assets to control records. 

Establishment and review of performance measures and indicators 

Management establishes activities to monitor performance measures and 
indicators. These may include comparisons and assessments relating 
different sets of data to one another so that analyses of the relationships 
can be made and appropriate actions taken. Management designs 
controls aimed at validating the propriety and integrity of both entity and 
individual performance measures and indicators. 

Segregation of duties 

Management divides or segregates key duties and responsibilities among 
different people to reduce the risk of error, misuse, or fraud. This includes 
separating the responsibilities for authorizing transactions, processing 
and recording them, reviewing the transactions, and handling any related 
assets so that no one individual controls all key aspects of a transaction 
or event. 


Proper execution of transactions 

Transactions are authorized and executed only by persons acting within 
the scope of their authority. This is the principal means of assuring that 
only valid transactions to exchange, transfer, use, or commit resources 
are initiated or entered into. Management clearly communicates 
authorizations to personnel. 

Accurate and timely recording of transactions 

Transactions are promptly recorded to maintain their relevance and value 
to management in controlling operations and making decisions. This 
applies to the entire process or life cycle of a transaction or event from its 
initiation and authorization through its final classification in summary 
records. In addition, management designs control activities so that all 
transactions are completely and accurately recorded. 

Access restrictions to and accountability for resources and records 

Management limits access to resources and records to authorized 
individuals, and assigns and maintains accountability for their custody 
and use. Management may periodically compare resources with the 
recorded accountability to help reduce the risk of errors, fraud, misuse, or 
unauthorized alteration. 

Appropriate documentation of transactions and internal control 

Management clearly documents internal control and all transactions and 
other significant events in a manner that allows the documentation to be 
readily available for examination. The documentation may appear in 
management directives, administrative policies, or operating manuals, in 
either paper or electronic form. Documentation and records are properly 
managed and maintained. 

An entity’s internal control is flexible to allow management to tailor control 
activities to meet the entity’s special needs. The specific control activities 
used by a given entity may be different from those used by others based 
on a number of factors. These factors could include specific threats the 
entity faces and risks it incurs; differences in objectives; managerial 
judgment; size and complexity of the entity; operational environment; 
sensitivity and value of data; and requirements for system reliability, 
availability, and performance. 


10.04 Control activities can be either preventive or detective. The main 
difference between preventive and detective control activities is the timing 
of a control activity within an entity’s operations. A preventive control 
activity prevents an entity from failing to achieve an objective or address a 
risk. A detective control activity discovers when an entity is not achieving 
an objective or addressing a risk before the entity’s operation has 
concluded and corrects the actions so that the entity achieves the 
objective or addresses the risk. 

10.05 Management evaluates the purpose of the control activity as well 
as the effect a deficiency would have on the entity in achieving its 
objectives. If the control activity is for a significant purpose or the impact 
of a deficiency would be significant to achieving the entity’s objectives, 
management may design both preventive and detective control activities. 

10.06 Control activities can be implemented in either an automated or a 
manual manner. Automated control activities are either wholly or partially 
automated through the entity’s information technology. Manual control 
activities are performed by individuals with minor use of the entity’s 
information technology. Automated control activities tend to be more 
reliable because they are less susceptible to human error and are 
typically more efficient.32 If the entity relies on information technology in 
its operations, management designs control activities so that the 
information technology continues to operate properly. 

32See paras. 11.06 through 11.08 for further discussion of information system control 
activities. 

 

Design of Control Activities 
at Various Levels 



10.07 Management designs control activities at the appropriate levels in 
the organizational structure. 

10.08 Management designs control activities for appropriate coverage of 
objectives and risks in the operations. Operational processes transform 
inputs into outputs to achieve the organization’s objectives. Management 
designs entity-level control activities, transaction control activities, or both 
depending on the level of precision needed so that the entity meets its 
objectives and addresses related risks. 


10.09 Entity-level controls are controls that have a pervasive effect on an 
entity’s internal control system and may pertain to multiple components. 
Entity-level controls may include controls related to the entity’s risk 
assessment process, control environment, service organizations, 
management override, and monitoring. 

10.10 Transaction control activities are actions built directly into 
operational processes to support the entity in achieving its objectives and 
addressing related risks. “Transactions” tends to be associated with 
financial processes (e.g., payables transactions), while “activities” is more 
generally applied to operational or compliance processes. For the 
purposes of this standard, “transactions” covers both definitions. 
Management may design a variety of transaction control activities for 
operational processes, which may include verifications, reconciliations, 
authorizations and approvals, physical control activities, and supervisory 
control activities. 

10.11 When choosing between entity-level and transaction control 
activities, management evaluates the level of precision needed for the 
operational processes to meet the entity’s objectives and address related 
risks. In determining the necessary level of precision for a control activity, 
management evaluates the following: 

• Purpose of the control activity - A control activity that functions to 
prevent or detect generally is more precise than a control activity that 
merely identifies and explains differences. 
• Level of aggregation - A control activity that is performed at a more 
granular level generally is more precise than one performed at a 
higher level. For example, an analysis of obligations by budget object 
class normally is more precise than an analysis of total obligations for 
the entity. 
• Consistency of performance - A control activity that is performed 
routinely and consistently generally is more precise than one 
performed sporadically. 
• Correlation to relevant operational processes - A control activity 
that is directly related to an operational process generally is more 
likely to prevent or detect than a control activity that is only indirectly 
related. 


 

Segregation of Duties 



10.12 Management considers segregation of duties in designing control 
activity responsibilities so that incompatible duties are segregated and, 
where such segregation is not practical, designs alternative control 
activities to address the risk. 


Control Activities 

10.13 Segregation of duties helps prevent fraud, waste, and abuse in the 
internal control system.33 Management considers the need to separate 
control activities related to authority, custody, and accounting of 
operations to achieve adequate segregation of duties. In particular, 
segregation of duties can address the risk of management override. 
Management override circumvents existing control activities and 
increases fraud risk. Management addresses this risk through 
segregation of duties, but cannot absolutely prevent it because of the risk 
of collusion, where two or more employees act together to commit fraud. 
10.14 If segregation of duties is not practical within an operational 
process because of limited personnel or other factors, management 
designs alternative control activities to address the risk of fraud, waste, or 
abuse in the operational process. 
Principle 11 -Design 
Activities for the 
Information System 

11.01 Management should design the entity’s information system and 
related control activities to achieve objectives and respond to risks. 
Attributes 

The following attributes contribute to the design, implementation, and 
operating effectiveness of this principle: 

• 
Design of the Entity’s Information System 
• 
Design of Appropriate Types of Control Activities 
• 
Design of Information Technology Infrastructure 
• 
Design of Security Management 
• 
Design of Information Technology Acquisition, Development, and 
Maintenance 
Design of the Entity’s 
Information System 

11.02 Management designs the entity’s information system to respond to 
the entity’s objectives and risks. 
11.03 Management designs the entity’s information system to obtain and 
process information to meet each operational process’s information 
requirements and to respond to the entity’s objectives and risks. An 
information system is the people, processes, data, and technology that 
33See paras. 8.02 through 8.03 for further discussion of fraud, waste, and abuse. 

Page 51 GAO-14-704G Federal Internal Control Standards 


Control Activities 

management organizes to obtain, communicate, or dispose of 
information. An information system represents the life cycle of information 
used for the entity’s operational processes that enables the entity to 
obtain, store, and process quality information.34 An information system 
includes both manual and technology-enabled information processes. 
Technology-enabled information processes are commonly referred to as 
information technology. As part of the control environment component, 
management defines responsibilities, assigns them to key roles, and 
delegates authority to achieve the entity’s objectives. As part of the risk 
assessment component, management identifies the risks related to the 
entity and its objectives, including its service organizations; the entity’s 
risk tolerance; and risk responses. Management designs control activities 
to fulfill defined responsibilities and address the identified risk responses 
for the entity’s information system. 

11.04 Management designs the entity’s information system and the use of 
information technology by considering the defined information 
requirements for each of the entity’s operational processes.35 Information 
technology enables information related to operational processes to 
become available to the entity on a timelier basis. Additionally, 
information technology may enhance internal control over security and 
confidentiality of information by appropriately restricting access. Although 
information technology implies specific types of control activities, 
information technology is not a “stand-alone” control consideration. It is 
an integral part of most control activities. 
11.05 Management also evaluates information processing objectives to 
meet the defined information requirements. Information processing 
objectives may include the following: 
• 
Completeness -Transactions that occur are recorded and not 
understated. 
• 
Accuracy -Transactions are recorded at the correct amount in the 
right account (and on a timely basis) at each stage of processing. 
34See paras. 13.02 through 13.06 for further discussion of the use of quality information. 

35See paras. 13.02 through 13.04 for further discussion of defined information 
requirements. 

Page 52 GAO-14-704G Federal Internal Control Standards 


• Validity - Recorded transactions represent economic events that 
actually occurred and were executed according to prescribed 
procedures. 


 

Design of Appropriate 
Types of Control Activities 



11.06 Management designs appropriate types of control activities in the 
entity’s information system for coverage of information processing 
objectives for operational processes. For information systems, there are 
two main types of control activities: general and application control 
activities. 

11.07 Information system general controls (at the entity-wide, system, 
and application levels) are the policies and procedures that apply to all or 
a large segment of an entity’s information systems. General controls 
facilitate the proper operation of information systems by creating the 
environment for proper operation of application controls. General controls 
include security management, logical and physical access, configuration 
management, segregation of duties, and contingency planning. 

11.08 Application controls, sometimes referred to as business process 
controls, are those controls that are incorporated directly into computer 
applications to achieve validity, completeness, accuracy, and 
confidentiality of transactions and data during application processing. 
Application controls include controls over input, processing, output, 
master file, interface, and data management system controls. 

 

Design of Information 
Technology Infrastructure 



11.09 Management designs control activities over the information 
technology infrastructure to support the completeness, accuracy, and 
validity of information processing by information technology. Information 
technology requires an infrastructure in which to operate, including 
communication networks for linking information technologies, computing 
resources for applications to operate, and electricity to power the 
information technology. An entity’s information technology infrastructure 
can be complex. It may be shared by different units within the entity or 
outsourced either to service organizations or to location-independent 
technology services. Management evaluates the objectives of the entity 
and related risks in designing control activities for the information 
technology infrastructure. 

11.10 Management continues to evaluate changes in the use of 
information technology and designs new control activities when these 
changes are incorporated into the entity’s information technology 


infrastructure. Management also designs control activities needed to 
maintain the information technology infrastructure. Maintaining technology 
often includes backup and recovery procedures, as well as continuity of 
operations plans, depending on the risks and consequences of a full or 
partial power systems outage. 

 

Design of Security 
Management 



11.11 Management designs control activities for security management of 
the entity’s information system for appropriate access by internal and 
external sources to protect the entity’s information system. Objectives for 
security management include confidentiality, integrity, and availability. 
Confidentiality means that data, reports, and other outputs are 
safeguarded against unauthorized access. Integrity means that 
information is safeguarded against improper modification or destruction, 
which includes ensuring information’s nonrepudiation and authenticity. 
Availability means that data, reports, and other relevant information are 
readily available to users when needed. 

11.12 Security management includes the information processes and 
control activities related to access rights in an entity’s information 
technology, including who has the ability to execute transactions. Security 
management includes access rights across various levels of data, 
operating system (system software), network, application, and physical 
layers. Management designs control activities over access to protect an 
entity from inappropriate access and unauthorized use of the system. 
These control activities support appropriate segregation of duties. By 
preventing unauthorized use of and changes to the system, data and 
program integrity are protected from malicious intent (e.g., someone 
breaking into the technology to commit fraud, vandalism, or terrorism) or 
error. 

11.13 Management evaluates security threats to information technology, 
which can be from both internal and external sources. External threats 
are particularly important for entities that depend on telecommunications 
networks and the Internet. External threats have become prevalent in 
today’s highly interconnected business environments, and continual effort 
is required to address these risks. Internal threats may come from former 
or disgruntled employees. They pose unique risks because they may be 
both motivated to work against the entity and better equipped to succeed 
in carrying out a malicious act as they have greater access to and 
knowledge of the entity’s security management systems and processes. 


11.14 Management designs control activities to limit user access to 
information technology through authorization control activities such as 
providing a unique user identification or token to authorized users. These 
control activities may restrict authorized users to the applications or 
functions commensurate with their assigned responsibilities, supporting 
an appropriate segregation of duties. Management designs other control 
activities to promptly update access rights when employees change job 
functions or leave the entity. Management also designs control activities 
for access rights when different information technology elements are 
connected to each other. 

 

Design of Information 
Technology Acquisition, 
Development, and 
Maintenance 



11.15 Management designs control activities over the acquisition, 
development, and maintenance of information technology. Management 
may use a systems development life cycle (SDLC) framework in 
designing control activities. An SDLC provides a structure for a new 
information technology design by outlining specific phases and 
documenting requirements, approvals, and checkpoints within control 
activities over the acquisition, development, and maintenance of 
technology. Through an SDLC, management designs control activities 
over changes to technology. This may involve requiring authorization of 
change requests; reviewing the changes, approvals, and testing results; 
and designing protocols to determine whether changes are made 
properly. Depending on the size and complexity of the entity, 
development of information technology and changes to the information 
technology may be included in one SDLC or two separate methodologies. 
Management evaluates the objectives and risks of the new technology in 
designing control activities over its SDLC. 

11.16 Management may acquire information technology through 
packaged software from vendors. Management incorporates 
methodologies for the acquisition of vendor packages into its information 
technology development and designs control activities over their 
selection, ongoing development, and maintenance. Control activities for 
the development, maintenance, and change of application software 
prevent unauthorized programs or modifications to existing programs. 

11.17 Another alternative is outsourcing the development of information 
technology to service organizations. As for an SDLC developed internally, 
management designs control activities to meet objectives and address 
related risks. Management also evaluates the unique risks that using a 
service organization presents for the completeness, accuracy, and validity 
of information submitted to and received from the service organization. 


Principle 12 - 
Implement Control 
Activities 

12.01 Management should implement control activities through policies. 

Attributes 

The following attributes contribute to the design, implementation, and 
operating effectiveness of this principle: 

• Documentation of Responsibilities through Policies 
• Periodic Review of Control Activities 


 

Documentation of 
Responsibilities through 
Policies 



12.02 Management documents in policies the internal control 
responsibilities of the organization. 

12.03 Management documents in policies for each unit its responsibility 
for an operational process’s objectives and related risks, and control 
activity design, implementation, and operating effectiveness.36 Each unit, 
with guidance from management, determines the policies necessary to 
operate the process based on the objectives and related risks for the 
operational process. Each unit also documents policies in the appropriate 
level of detail to allow management to effectively monitor the control 
activity. 

36See paras. 3.02 through 3.05 for further discussion of units. 

37See para. 17.06 for further discussion of corrective actions. 

12.04 Those in key roles for the unit may further define policies through 
day-to-day procedures, depending on the rate of change in the operating 
environment and complexity of the operational process. Procedures may 
include the timing of when a control activity occurs and any follow-up 
corrective actions to be performed by competent personnel if deficiencies 
are identified.37 Management communicates to personnel the policies and 
procedures so that personnel can implement the control activities for their 
assigned responsibilities. 

 

Periodic Review of Control 
Activities 



12.05 Management periodically reviews policies, procedures, and related 
control activities for continued relevance and effectiveness in achieving 
the entity’s objectives or addressing related risks. If there is a significant 
change in an entity’s process, management reviews this process in a 


timely manner after the change to determine that the control activities are 
designed and implemented appropriately. Changes may occur in 
personnel, operational processes, or information technology. Regulators; 
legislators; and in the federal environment, the Office of Management and 
Budget and the Department of the Treasury may also change either an 
entity’s objectives or how an entity is to achieve an objective. 
Management considers these changes in its periodic review. 


 

Overview 

Management uses quality information to support the internal control 
system. Effective information and communication are vital for an entity to 
achieve its objectives. Entity management needs access to relevant and 
reliable communication related to internal as well as external events. 

Principles 

13. Management should use quality information to achieve the entity’s 
objectives. 

14. Management should internally communicate the necessary quality 
information to achieve the entity’s objectives. 

15. Management should externally communicate the necessary quality 
information to achieve the entity’s objectives. 

 

 

 

 

 


Principle 13 - Use 
Quality Information 

13.01 Management should use quality information to achieve the entity’s 
objectives. 

Attributes 

The following attributes contribute to the design, implementation, and 
operating effectiveness of this principle: 

• Identification of Information Requirements 
• Relevant Data from Reliable Sources 
• Data Processed into Quality Information 


 

Identification of 
Information Requirements 



13.02 Management designs a process that uses the entity’s objectives 
and related risks to identify the information requirements needed to 
achieve the objectives and address the risks. Information requirements 
consider the expectations of both internal and external users. 
Management defines the identified information requirements at the 
relevant level and requisite specificity for appropriate personnel. 

13.03 Management identifies information requirements in an iterative and 
ongoing process that occurs throughout an effective internal control 
system. As change in the entity and its objectives and risks occurs, 
management changes information requirements as needed to meet these 
modified objectives and address these modified risks. 

 

Relevant Data from 
Reliable Sources 



13.04 Management obtains relevant data from reliable internal and 
external sources in a timely manner based on the identified information 
requirements. Relevant data have a logical connection with, or bearing 
upon, the identified information requirements. Reliable internal and 
external sources provide data that are reasonably free from error and bias 
and faithfully represent what they purport to represent. Management 
evaluates both internal and external sources of data for reliability. 
Sources of data can be operational, financial, or compliance related. 
Management obtains data on a timely basis so that they can be used for 
effective monitoring. 

 

Data Processed into 
Quality Information 



13.05 Management processes the obtained data into quality information 
that supports the internal control system. This involves processing data 
into information and then evaluating the processed information so that it is 
quality information. Quality information meets the identified information 


Information and Communication 

requirements when relevant data from reliable sources are used. Quality 
information is appropriate, current, complete, accurate, accessible, and 
provided on a timely basis. Management considers these characteristics 
as well as the information processing objectives in evaluating processed 
information and makes revisions when necessary so that the information 
is quality information.38 Management uses the quality information to make 
informed decisions and evaluate the entity’s performance in achieving key 
objectives and addressing risks. 

13.06 Management processes relevant data from reliable sources into 
quality information within the entity’s information system. An information 
system is the people, processes, data, and technology that management 
organizes to obtain, communicate, or dispose of information.39 
Principle 14 Communicate 
Internally 

14.01 Management should internally communicate the necessary quality 
information to achieve the entity’s objectives. 
Attributes 

The following attributes contribute to the design, implementation, and 
operating effectiveness of this principle: 

• 
Communication throughout the Entity 
• 
Appropriate Methods of Communication 
Communication 
throughout the Entity 

14.02 Management communicates quality information throughout the 
entity using established reporting lines. Quality information is 
communicated down, across, up, and around reporting lines to all levels 
of the entity. 
14.03 Management communicates quality information down and across 
reporting lines to enable personnel to perform key roles in achieving 
objectives, addressing risks, and supporting the internal control system. 
In these communications, management assigns the internal control 
responsibilities for key roles. 
38See paras. 11.02 through 11.05 for further discussion of information processing 
objectives. 

39See paras. 11.02 through 11.05 for further discussion of information systems. 

Page 60 GAO-14-704G Federal Internal Control Standards 


14.04 Management receives quality information about the entity’s 
operational processes that flows up the reporting lines from personnel to 
help management achieve the entity’s objectives. 

14.05 The oversight body receives quality information that flows up the 
reporting lines from management and personnel. Information relating to 
internal control communicated to the oversight body includes significant 
matters about adherence to, changes in, or issues arising from the 
internal control system. This upward communication is necessary for the 
effective oversight of internal control. 

14.06 Personnel use separate reporting lines to go around upward 
reporting lines when these lines are compromised. Laws and regulations 
may require entities to establish separate lines of communication, such as 
whistleblower and ethics hotlines, for communicating confidential 
information. Management informs employees of these separate reporting 
lines, how they operate, how they are to be used, and how the 
information will remain confidential. 

 

Appropriate Methods of 
Communication 



14.07 Management selects appropriate methods to communicate 
internally. Management considers a variety of factors in selecting an 
appropriate method of communication. Some factors to consider follow: 

• Audience - The intended recipients of the communication 
• Nature of information - The purpose and type of information being 
communicated 
• Availability - Information readily available to the audience when 
needed 
• Cost - The resources used to communicate the information 
• Legal or regulatory requirements - Requirements in laws and 
regulations that may impact communication 


 

14.08 Based on consideration of the factors, management selects 
appropriate methods of communication, such as a written document—in 
hard copy or electronic format—or a face-to-face meeting. Management 
periodically evaluates the entity’s methods of communication so that the 
organization has the appropriate tools to communicate quality information 
throughout the entity on a timely basis. 

 


Principle 15 - 
Communicate 
Externally 

15.01 Management should externally communicate the necessary quality 
information to achieve the entity’s objectives. 

Attributes 

The following attributes contribute to the design, implementation, and 
operating effectiveness of this principle: 

• Communication with External Parties 
• Appropriate Methods of Communication 


 

Communication with 
External Parties 



15.02 Management communicates with, and obtains quality information 
from, external parties using established reporting lines. Open two-way 
external reporting lines allow for this communication. External parties 
include suppliers, contractors, service organizations, regulators, external 
auditors, government entities, and the general public. 

15.03 Management communicates quality information externally through 
reporting lines so that external parties can help the entity achieve its 
objectives and address related risks. Management includes in these 
communications information relating to the entity’s events and activities 
that impact the internal control system. 

15.04 Management receives information through reporting lines from 
external parties. Information communicated to management includes 
significant matters relating to risks, changes, or issues that impact the 
entity’s internal control system. This communication is necessary for the 
effective operation of internal control. Management evaluates external 
information received against the characteristics of quality information and 
information processing objectives and takes any necessary actions so 
that the information is quality information.40 

40See paras. 11.02 through 11.05 for further discussion of information processing 
objectives. 

15.05 The oversight body receives information through reporting lines 
from external parties. Information communicated to the oversight body 
includes significant matters relating to risks, changes, or issues that 
impact the entity’s internal control system. This communication is 
necessary for the effective oversight of internal control. 


15.06 External parties use separate reporting lines when external 
reporting lines are compromised. Laws and regulations may require 
entities to establish separate lines of communication, such as 
whistleblower and ethics hotlines, for communicating confidential 
information. Management informs external parties of these separate 
reporting lines, how they operate, how they are to be used, and how the 
information will remain confidential. 

 

Appropriate Methods of 
Communication 



15.07 Management selects appropriate methods to communicate 
externally. Management considers a variety of factors in selecting an 
appropriate method of communication. Some factors to consider follow: 

• Audience - The intended recipients of the communication 
• Nature of information - The purpose and type of information being 
communicated 
• Availability - Information readily available to the audience when 
needed 
• Cost - The resources used to communicate the information 
• Legal or regulatory requirements - Requirements in laws and 
regulations that may impact communication 


 

15.08 Based on consideration of the factors, management selects 
appropriate methods of communication, such as a written document—in 
hard copy or electronic format—or a face-to-face meeting. Management 
periodically evaluates the entity’s methods of communication so that the 
organization has the appropriate tools to communicate quality information 
throughout and outside of the entity on a timely basis. 

15.09 Government entities not only report to the head of the government, 
legislators, and regulators but to the general public as well. In the federal 
government, entities not only report to the President and Congress but 
also to the general public. Entities consider appropriate methods when 
communicating with such a broad audience. 


Monitoring 

 

Overview 

Finally, since internal control is a dynamic process that has to be adapted 
continually to the risks and changes an entity faces, monitoring of the 
internal control system is essential in helping internal control remain 
aligned with changing objectives, environment, laws, resources, and 
risks. Internal control monitoring assesses the quality of performance over 
time and promptly resolves the findings of audits and other reviews. 
Corrective actions are a necessary complement to control activities in 
order to achieve objectives. 

Principles 

16. Management should establish and operate monitoring activities to 
monitor the internal control system and evaluate the results. 

17. Management should remediate identified internal control deficiencies 
on a timely basis. 

 

 

 

 


Principle 16 - Perform 
Monitoring Activities 

16.01 Management should establish and operate monitoring activities to 
monitor the internal control system and evaluate the results. 

Attributes 

The following attributes contribute to the design, implementation, and 
operating effectiveness of this principle: 

• Establishment of a Baseline 
• Internal Control System Monitoring 
• Evaluation of Results 


 

Establishment of a 
Baseline 



16.02 Management establishes a baseline to monitor the internal control 
system. The baseline is the current state of the internal control system 
compared against management’s design of the internal control system. 
The baseline represents the difference between the criteria of the design 
of the internal control system and condition of the internal control system 
at a specific point in time. In other words, the baseline consists of issues 
and deficiencies identified in an entity’s internal control system. 

16.03 Once established, management can use the baseline as criteria in 
evaluating the internal control system and make changes to reduce the 
difference between the criteria and condition. Management reduces this 
difference in one of two ways. Management either changes the design of 
the internal control system to better address the objectives and risks of 
the entity or improves the operating effectiveness of the internal control 
system. As part of monitoring, management determines when to revise 
the baseline to reflect changes in the internal control system. 

 

Internal Control System 
Monitoring 



16.04 Management monitors the internal control system through ongoing 
monitoring and separate evaluations. Ongoing monitoring is built into the 
entity’s operations, performed continually, and responsive to change. 
Separate evaluations are used periodically and may provide feedback on 
the effectiveness of ongoing monitoring. 

16.05 Management performs ongoing monitoring of the design and 
operating effectiveness of the internal control system as part of the 
normal course of operations. Ongoing monitoring includes regular 
management and supervisory activities, comparisons, reconciliations, and 
other routine actions. Ongoing monitoring may include automated tools, 


which can increase objectivity and efficiency by electronically compiling 
evaluations of controls and transactions. 

16.06 Management uses separate evaluations to monitor the design and 
operating effectiveness of the internal control system at a specific time or 
of a specific function or process. The scope and frequency of separate 
evaluations depend primarily on the assessment of risks, effectiveness of 
ongoing monitoring, and rate of change within the entity and its 
environment. Separate evaluations may take the form of selfassessments, 
which include cross operating unit or cross functional 
evaluations. 

16.07 Separate evaluations also include audits and other evaluations that 
may involve the review of control design and direct testing of internal 
control. These audits and other evaluations may be mandated by law and 
are performed by internal auditors, external auditors, the inspectors 
general, and other external reviewers. Separate evaluations provide 
greater objectivity when performed by reviewers who do not have 
responsibility for the activities being evaluated. 

16.08 Management retains responsibility for monitoring the effectiveness 
of internal control over the assigned processes performed by service 
organizations. Management uses ongoing monitoring, separate 
evaluations, or a combination of the two to obtain reasonable assurance 
of the operating effectiveness of the service organization’s internal 
controls over the assigned process.41 Monitoring activities related to 
service organizations may include the use of work performed by external 
parties, such as service auditors, and reviewed by management. 

41See paras. OV4.01 through OV4.03 for further discussion of service organizations. 

 

Evaluation of Results 



16.09 Management evaluates and documents the results of ongoing 
monitoring and separate evaluations to identify internal control issues. 
Management uses this evaluation to determine the effectiveness of the 
internal control system. Differences between the results of monitoring 
activities and the previously established baseline may indicate internal 
control issues, including undocumented changes in the internal control 
system or potential internal control deficiencies. 


16.10 Management identifies changes in the internal control system that 
either have occurred or are needed because of changes in the entity and 
its environment. External parties can also help management identify 
issues in the internal control system. For example, complaints from the 
general public and regulator comments may indicate areas in the internal 
control system that need improvement. Management considers whether 
current controls address the identified issues and modifies controls if 
necessary. 

 

Principle 17 - 
Evaluate Issues and 
Remediate 
Deficiencies 



17.01 Management should remediate identified internal control 
deficiencies on a timely basis. 

Attributes 

The following attributes contribute to the design, implementation, and 
operating effectiveness of this principle: 

• Reporting of Issues 
• Evaluation of Issues 
• Corrective Actions 


 

Reporting of Issues 



17.02 Personnel report internal control issues through established 
reporting lines to the appropriate internal and external parties on a timely 
basis to enable the entity to promptly evaluate those issues.42 

42See paras. 14.02 through 14.06 for further discussion of internal reporting lines and 
paras. 15.02 through 15.06 for further discussion of external reporting lines. 

17.03 Personnel may identify internal control issues while performing their 
assigned internal control responsibilities. Personnel communicate these 
issues internally to the person in the key role responsible for the internal 
control or associated process and, when appropriate, to at least one level 
of management above that individual. Depending on the nature of the 
issues, personnel may consider reporting certain issues to the oversight 
body. Such issues may include 

• issues that cut across the organizational structure or extend outside 
the entity to service organizations, contractors, or suppliers and 



Monitoring 

• 
issues that may not be remediated because of the interests of 
management, such as sensitive information regarding fraud or other 
illegal acts.43 
17.04 Depending on the entity’s regulatory or compliance requirements, 
the entity may also be required to report issues externally to appropriate 
external parties, such as the legislators, regulators, and standard-setting 
bodies that establish laws, rules, regulations, and standards to which the 
entity is subject. 
Evaluation of Issues 

17.05 Management evaluates and documents internal control issues and 
determines appropriate corrective actions for internal control deficiencies 
on a timely basis. Management evaluates issues identified through 
monitoring activities or reported by personnel to determine whether any of 
the issues rise to the level of an internal control deficiency. Internal 
control deficiencies require further evaluation and remediation by 
management. An internal control deficiency can be in the design, 
implementation, or operating effectiveness of the internal control and its 
related process.44 Management determines from the type of internal 
control deficiency the appropriate corrective actions to remediate the 
internal control deficiency on a timely basis. Management assigns 
responsibility and delegates authority to remediate the internal control 
deficiency. 
Corrective Actions 

17.06 Management completes and documents corrective actions to 
remediate internal control deficiencies on a timely basis. These corrective 
actions include resolution of audit findings. Depending on the nature of 
the deficiency, either the oversight body or management oversees the 
prompt remediation of deficiencies by communicating the corrective 
actions to the appropriate level of the organizational structure and 
delegating authority for completing corrective actions to appropriate 
personnel. The audit resolution process begins when audit or other 
review results are reported to management, and is completed only after 
action has been taken that (1) corrects identified deficiencies, 
43See paras. 8.02 through 8.03 for further discussion of fraud. 

44See paras. OV3.07 through OV3.11 for further discussion of evaluation of internal 
control deficiencies. 

Page 68 GAO-14-704G Federal Internal Control Standards 


(2) produces improvements, or (3) demonstrates that the findings and 
recommendations do not warrant management action. Management, with 
oversight from the oversight body, monitors the status of remediation 
efforts so that they are completed on a timely basis. 


The following is a list of the requirements included in the Green Book. 

The five components of internal control must be effectively designed, 
implemented, and operating, and operating together in an integrated 
manner, for an internal control system to be effective. (paragraph 
OV2.04) 

The 17 principles support the effective design, implementation, and 
operation of the associated components and represent requirements 
necessary to establish an effective internal control system. The 17 
principle requirements of the Green Book are as follows: 

1. The oversight body and management should demonstrate a 
commitment to integrity and ethical values. 

2. The oversight body should oversee the entity’s internal control system. 

3. Management should establish an organizational structure, assign 
responsibility, and delegate authority to achieve the entity’s objectives. 

4. Management should demonstrate a commitment to recruit, develop, 
and retain competent individuals. 

5. Management should evaluate performance and hold individuals 
accountable for their internal control responsibilities. 

6. Management should define objectives clearly to enable the 
identification of risks and define risk tolerances. 

7. Management should identify, analyze, and respond to risks related to 
achieving the defined objectives. 

8. Management should consider the potential for fraud when identifying, 
analyzing, and responding to risks. 

9. Management should identify, analyze, and respond to significant 
changes that could impact the internal control system. 

10. Management should design control activities to achieve objectives 
and respond to risks. 

11. Management should design the entity’s information system and 
related control activities to achieve objectives and respond to risks. 


12. Management should implement control activities through policies. 

13. Management should use quality information to achieve the entity’s 
objectives. 

14. Management should internally communicate the necessary quality 
information to achieve the entity’s objectives. 

15. Management should externally communicate the necessary quality 
information to achieve the entity’s objectives. 

16. Management should establish and operate monitoring activities to 
monitor the internal control system and evaluate the results. 

17. Management should remediate identified internal control deficiencies 
on a timely basis. 

Documentation is a necessary part of an effective internal control system. 
The level and nature of documentation vary based on the size of the 
entity and the complexity of the operational processes the entity performs. 
Management uses judgment in determining the extent of documentation 
that is needed. Documentation is required to demonstrate the design, 
implementation, and operating effectiveness of an entity’s internal control 
system. The Green Book includes minimum documentation requirements 
as follows: 

• If management determines that a principle is not relevant, 
management supports that determination with documentation that 
includes the rationale of how, in the absence of that principle, the 
associated component could be designed, implemented, and 
operated effectively. (paragraph OV2.06) 
• Management develops and maintains documentation of its internal 
control system. (paragraph 3.09) 
• Management documents in policies the internal control responsibilities 
of the organization. (paragraph 12.02) 
• Management evaluates and documents the results of ongoing 
monitoring and separate evaluations to identify internal control issues. 
(paragraph 16.09) 
• Management evaluates and documents internal control issues and 
determines appropriate corrective actions for internal control 
deficiencies on a timely basis. (paragraph 17.05) 



• Management completes and documents corrective actions to 
remediate internal control deficiencies on a timely basis. (paragraph 
17.06) 



Comptroller General’s 
Advisory Council on 
Standards for Internal 
Control in the Federal 
Government 
(2013-2015) 



The Honorable Jon Rymer, Chair 
U.S. Department of Defense, Office of the Inspector General 

Dr. Brett Baker 
National Science Foundation, Office of the Inspector General 

Lisa Casias 
U.S. Department of Commerce 

Carole Clay 
U.S. Department of State 

Melinda DeCorte 
Crowe Horwath LLP 

Stephen M. Eells 
New Jersey Office of Legislative Services, Office of the State Auditor 

Dr. Carol M. Eyermann 
National Science Foundation 

Bill Hughes 
MorganFranklin Consulting LLC 

Scot Janssen 
KPMG LLP 

John Kaschak 
Pennsylvania Office of the Budget, Bureau of Audits 

David L. Landsittel 
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission 

The Honorable Samuel T. Mok 
Condor International Advisors, LLC 

Kenneth J. Mory 
City of Austin, Texas 

Dan Murrin 
Ernst & Young 


Dr. Annette K. Pridgen 
Jackson State University 

Dr. Sandra B. Richtermeyer 
Xavier University 

Neil Ryder 
U.S. Department of Justice 

Peggy Sherry 
U.S. Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service 

F. Michael Taylor 
Hanover County Government, Virginia 

David A. Von Moll 
Commonwealth of Virginia Office of the State Comptroller 

David M. Zavada 
Kearney & Company 

 

GAO Project Team 



Steven J. Sebastian, Managing Director 
James R. Dalkin, Director 
Robert F. Dacey, Chief Accountant 
Jacquelyn N. Hamilton, Deputy Assistant General Counsel 
Kristen A. Kociolek, Assistant Director 
Grant L. Simmons, Senior Auditor 
Christie A. Pugnetti, Senior Auditor 

 

Staff 
Acknowledgments 



In addition to the project team named above, also contributing were 
Francine M. DelVecchio, Lee Evans, Marci L. Goasdone, Peter B. 
Grinnell, Brian S. Harechmak, Debra L. Hoffman, Heather I. Keister, 
Jason M. Kelly, Judy Lee, William S. Lowrey, Alan S. MacMullin, Mary 
Arnold Mohiyuddin, Mary O. Osorno, Doris G. Yanger, and Kimberly Y. 
Young. 


Glossary 

The following terms are provided to assist in clarifying the Standards for 
Internal Control in the Federal Government. The most relevant paragraph 
numbers are provided for reference. 

Application controls - Controls that are incorporated directly into 
computer applications for the purposes of validity, completeness, 
accuracy, and confidentiality of transactions and data during application 
processing; application controls include controls over input, processing, 
output, master file, interface, and data management system controls 
(paragraph 11.08) 

Attributes - Additional information that provides further explanation of the 
principles and documentation requirements for effective internal control 
(paragraph OV2.07) 

Baseline - The difference between the criteria of the design of the 
internal control system and condition of the internal control system at a 
specific point in time (paragraph 16.02) 

Competence - The qualification to carry out assigned responsibilities 
(paragraph 4.02) 

Complementary user entity controls - Controls that management of the 
service organization assumes, in the design of its service, will be 
implemented by user entities, and if necessary to achieve the control 
objectives stated in management’s description of the service 
organization’s system, are identified as such in that description 
(paragraph OV4.02) 

Component - One of the five required elements of internal control. The 
internal control components are Control Environment, Risk Assessment, 
Control Activities, Information and Communication, and Monitoring 
(paragraph OV2.04) 

Contingency plans - The processes defined to address an entity’s need 
to respond to sudden personnel changes that could compromise the 
internal control system (paragraph 4.06) 

Control activities - The policies, procedures, techniques, and 
mechanisms that enforce management’s directives to achieve the entity’s 
objectives and address related risks (paragraph 10.02) 


Control objective - The aim or purpose of specified controls; 
control objectives address the risks related to achieving an entity’s 
objectives (paragraph OV3.05) 

Deficiency - When the design, implementation, or operation of a control 
does not allow management or personnel, in the normal course of 
performing their assigned functions, to achieve control objectives and 
address related risks (paragraph OV3.07) 

Detective control - An activity that is designed to discover when an entity 
is not achieving an objective or addressing a risk before the entity’s 
operation has concluded and corrects the actions so that the entity 
achieves the objective or addresses the risk (paragraph 10.04) 

Entity-level control - Controls that have a pervasive effect on an entity’s 
internal control system; entity-level controls may include controls related 
to the entity’s risk assessment process, control environment, service 
organizations, management override, and monitoring (paragraph 10.09) 

Fraud - Involves obtaining something of value through willful 
misrepresentation (paragraph 8.02) 

General controls - The policies and procedures that apply to all or a 
large segment of an entity’s information systems; general controls include 
security management, logical and physical access, configuration 
management, segregation of duties, and contingency planning 
(paragraph 11.07) 

Green Book - The commonly used name for Standards for Internal 
Control in the Federal Government (Overview: Foreword) 

Information system - The people, processes, data, and technology 
management organizes to obtain, communicate, or dispose of information 
(paragraph 11.03) 

Information technology - Technology-enabled information processes 
(paragraph 11.03) 

Inherent risk - The risk to an entity prior to considering management’s 
response to the risk (paragraph 7.03) 


Internal control - A process effected by an entity’s oversight body, 
management, and other personnel that provides reasonable assurance 
that the objectives of an entity will be achieved (paragraph OV1.01) 

Internal control system - A continuous built-in component of operations, 
effected by people, that provides reasonable assurance—not absolute 
assurance—that an entity’s objectives will be achieved 
(paragraph OV1.04) 

Key role - A position in an organizational structure that is assigned an 
overall responsibility of an entity (paragraph 3.06) 

Likelihood of occurrence - The level of possibility that a risk will occur 
(paragraph 7.06) 

Magnitude of impact - Severity of deficiency that could result from a risk 
and is affected by factors such as the size, pace, and duration of the 
risk’s impact (paragraph 7.06) 

Management - Personnel who are directly responsible for all activities of 
an entity, including the design, implementation, and operating 
effectiveness of an entity’s internal control system (paragraph OV2.14) 

Must - Denotes a requirement that management must comply with in all 
cases; these requirements are the components of internal control 
(paragraph OV2.04) 

Organizational structure - The operating units, operational processes, 
and other structures management uses to achieve objectives (paragraph 
OV2.10) 

Oversight body - Those responsible for overseeing management’s 
design, implementation, and operation of an internal control system 
(paragraph OV2.14) 

Performance measure - A means of evaluating the entity’s performance 
in achieving objectives (paragraph 6.07) 

Policies - Statements of responsibility for an operational process’s 
objectives and related risks, and control activity design, implementation, 
and operating effectiveness (paragraph 12.03) 


Preventive control - An activity that is designed to prevent an entity from 
failing to achieve an objective or addressing a risk (paragraph 10.04) 

Principle - Fundamental concept that is integral to the design, 
implementation, and operating effectiveness of the associated component 
(paragraph OV2.05) 

Qualitative objectives - Objectives where management may need to 
design performance measures that indicate a level or degree of 
performance, such as milestones (paragraph 6.07) 

Quality information - Information from relevant and reliable data that is 
appropriate, current, complete, accurate, accessible, and provided on a 
timely basis, and meets identified information requirements (paragraph 
13.05) 

Quantitative objectives - Objectives where performance measures may 
be a targeted percentage or numerical value (paragraph 6.07) 

Reasonable assurance - A high degree of confidence, but not absolute 
confidence (paragraph OV1.04) 

Reporting lines - Communication lines, both internal and external, at all 
levels of the organization that provide methods of communication that can 
flow down, across, up, and around the organizational structure 
(paragraph 3.04) 

Residual risk - The risk that remains after management’s response to 
inherent risk (paragraph 7.03) 

Risk - The possibility that an event will occur and adversely affect the 
achievement of objectives (paragraph 7.02) 

Risk tolerance - The acceptable level of variation in performance relative 
to the achievement of objectives (paragraph 6.08) 

Security management - The information processes and control activities 
related to access rights in an entity’s information technology 
(paragraph 11.12) 

Segregation of duties - The separation of the authority, custody, and 
accounting of an operation (paragraph 10.13) 


Service organization - An external party that performs operational 
process(es) for an entity (paragraph OV4.01) 

Should - Denotes a principle requirement management must comply with 
except in rare circumstances where the requirement is not relevant for the 
entity (paragraph OV2.09) 

Succession plans - The processes that address an entity’s need to 
replace competent personnel over the long term (paragraph 4.06) 

Transaction - An event that may occur in operational, compliance, or 
financial processes (paragraph 10.10) 

Transaction control activities - Actions built directly into operational 
processes to support the entity in achieving its objectives and addressing 
related risks (paragraph 10.10) 

(194915) 




Recycle!PleasePrintRecycledPaper
Please Print on Recycled Paper. 
The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation, and 
investigative arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its 
constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and 
accountability of the federal government for the American people. GAO 
examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and 
policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance 
to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. 
GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of 
accountability, integrity, and reliability. 

The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no 
cost is through GAO’s website (http://www.gao.gov). Each weekday 
afternoon, GAO posts on its website newly released reports, testimony, 
and correspondence. To have GAO e-mail you a list of newly posted 
products, go to http://www.gao.gov and select “E-mail Updates.” 

The printed version of the 2014 Standards for Internal Control in the 
Federal Government can be ordered through the Government Printing 
Office (GPO) online http://bookstore.gpo.gov/ or by calling 202-512-1800 
or 1-866-512-1800 toll free. 

Connect with GAO on Facebook, Flickr, Twitter, and YouTube. 
Subscribe to our RSS Feeds or E-mail Updates. Listen to our Podcasts. 
Visit GAO on the web at www.gao.gov. 

Contact: 

Website: http://www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htm 
E-mail: fraudnet@gao.gov 
Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7470 

Katherine Siggerud, Managing Director, siggerudk@gao.gov, (202) 512- 
4400, U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 
7125, Washington, DC 20548 

Chuck Young, Managing Director, youngc1@gao.gov, (202) 512-4800 
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149 
Washington, DC 20548 
GAO’s Mission 

Obtaining Copies of 
GAO Reports and 
Testimony 

Order Printed Copies 

Connect with GAO 

To Report Fraud, 
Waste, and Abuse in 
Federal Programs 

Congressional 
Relations 

Public Affairs 




