



User Guide 




Disclaimers 

This document may not be disclosed outside of the Agency without the written permission of the Bureau of 
the Fiscal Service. In addition, this document may not be posted on a public website or other publicly 
accessible server without the written permission of the Bureau of the Fiscal Service. 

In addition: 



- Adobe, Acrobat, and Acrobat Reader are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Adobe Systems Incorporated 
in the United States and/or other countries. 

- Microsoft, the Windows logo, Microsoft Internet Explorer and Microsoft Excel are either registered trademarks or 
trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other countries. 

- Oracle and Java are registered trademarks of Oracle and/or its affiliates. Other names may be trademarks of their 
respective owners. 

- All other company and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks for their respective owners. 




Welcome to G-Invoicing 

G-Invoicing is a web-based application that was developed to efficiently manage Intra-governmental (Intragov) Buy/Sell 
transactions between two federal agencies from the creation of the General Terms & Conditions (GT&Cs) to the Intragovernmental 
Payment and Collection (IPAC) system payment notification. The United States Department of the 
Treasury’s Bureau of the Fiscal Service offers G-Invoicing at no charge to all Federal agencies. The United States 
Department of the Treasury provides central payment services to Federal Program Agencies by operating the federal 
government's collections and deposit systems, providing government-wide accounting and reporting services, and 
managing the collection of delinquent debt owed to the government. 

Users access G-Invoicing through a secure web-based portal, which has been certified to conform to Federal security 
standards. The User portion of G-Invoicing is a fully integrated electronic solution which supports the buy/sell standard 
business process between two federal agencies: the Requesting Agency and the Servicing Agency . 

- A Requesting Agency acts as a buyer, and may create, approve, reject, and close Interagency Agreement (IAA) 
GT&Cs and Orders. 

- A Servicing Agency acts as a seller, and may create, approve, and close Interagency Agreement (IAA) GT&Cs, may 
create, approve, and reject Orders, and may generate Performance off of Orders. 

G-Invoicing helps manage Intragov transactions by enabling users to establish trading partners, to create GT&Cs and 
Orders, and to generate Performance off of Orders. 

A GT&C is a written agreement entered into between two Federal agencies, or major organizational units within an 
agency, which specifies the goods to be furnished or tasks to be accomplished by one agency (the Servicing Agency) in 
support of the other agency (the Requesting Agency). The standard Interagency Agreement (IAA) form is comprised of 
two parts: the GT&C Section IAA-7600A, and Order Requirements and Funding Information (aka Orders) Section IAA- 
7600B. The IAA is the recommended standard form to be used government-wide for all reimbursable agreements at the 
Buy/Sell level, including (but not limited to): agreements between agencies, agreements within agencies, grant-related 
agreements, and assisted acquisitions. 

An Order provides specific details regarding the items/services the Requesting Agency is purchasing from the Servicing 
Agency, and any related funding information for the purchase. Orders contain two sections: the Header and the Line 
Items. The Header contains general information about the trading partners, the associated GT&C, amount, effective 
date, and payment term information. The Line Items enumerate the specific goods or services the agency wishes to 
order. 

A Performance transaction is the exchange of data which indicates that the IGT Buy/Sell activity that has been agreed 
upon between Requesting and Servicing Agencies has been completed. 

Settlement is the transfer of funds from the Requesting Agency to the Servicing Agency via IPAC once the exchange of 
goods and/or services between the two parties has been completed through Performance. 

The IPAC system facilitates the transfer of funds for reimbursable activity between federal agencies, and allows all cash 
in transit to remain inside the government’s Fund Balance with the United States Department of the Treasury. IPAC’s 
primary role is to provide a standardized mechanism for fund transfers, while allowing agencies to share descriptive 
data with one another. IPAC continues to manage the settlement of funds and store historical transaction data. 

A brief, graphic representation of the Intra-governmental (IGT) Buy/Sell Transaction Lifecycle: 







Downloading the User Guide 

Online help files are available in G-Invoicing, and provide information on G-Invoicing procedures, concepts, and general 
system information. 

 

CRITICAL NOTE : The G-Invoicing User Guide is available to download as a PDF from the Help button located near the 
top right portion of any page within the system. It is highly recommended that users download the PDF to their 
computer desktop, and then view the document in Adobe reader to ensure that the proper formatting is maintained. 
Attempting to download and view the PDF in an internet browser will generate inconsistent results, and may cause 
potential formatting issues. 

 

Please note that the help file options that display in the drop down menu for users will depend on what type of roles 
they hold in the system (i.e., User or Administrator). 

 

The User Guide is a large file (5MB-10MB), and may take some time to download. 

 

How to Access the Online Help Files : 

 

 

1. Log into G-Invoicing and clicking on the Help link near the top right-hand corner of each page: 

 



 

 

2. In the drop-down menu, users have their choice of displaying the online help files in the user interface, or by 
downloading a .pdf version of the help files. 

- To view the help files in the user interface, click on either View User Help or View Administration 
Help . The online help files will display on a new web page. 

- To download a .pdf of the help files, click on either Download User Help or Download Administration 
Help . Depending on what web browser you are using, either click on the name of the file at the left-hand 
corner of the screen, or click on Open to display the files as a .pdf (you may also have the option to save 
the file directly to your machine). 

Once you open the .pdf, click on the ribbon icon at the top right corner of the screen to display the Table of 
Contents: 

 

 

 


Scheduled System Maintenances 

Users will be notified in advance of scheduled system maintenances within G-Invoicing that will affect user access to the 
system. The notifications will be sent and posted in the following ways: 

 

- Global emails* will be sent from the United States Department of the Treasury Bureau of the Fiscal Service to all users 
who have Active user accounts in G-Invoicing 

- Notices will be posted in the News and Information section on the G-Invoicing Welcome page 

 

*User accounts in the G-Invoicing QA (Testing) environment that use unofficial email addresses for testing purposes 
may not receive the emails. 


G-Invoicing Sign-In Page URLs 

As part of G-Invoicing Release 3.3, new log in page URLs were introduced for both system environments. However, 
users were still able to log in to the document portion of G-Invoicing using the older URL. As part of G-Invoicing Release 
4.0, the old, legacy URLs for Production and QA/Training were retired . Users are encouraged to update the 
Bookmarks/Favorites list in their internet browser(s) to the newer G-Invoicing sign in page URLs: 

 

- Production: https://igt.fiscal.treasury.gov 

- QA/Training: https://qa.igt.fiscal.treasury.gov 

 

Upon clicking on either of the URLs, you will be presented with a sign in page: 

 

 

 

Simply enter your G-Invoicing User ID and Password into the appropriate fields to log in. Once you have logged in, you 
will be presented with the updated G-Invoicing Welcome Page . 


About Single User Multiple Account Access 

A single user may be associated with multiple agencies/agency accounts within G-Invoicing, and may access all of their 
accounts in a single session using the same User ID and password without having to sign in-and-out of the application. 

 

To access a different account in a single user session, select the account from the Account Selection drop-down menu 
near the top of the page. The Account Selection list box displays all of the agency user’s associated accounts; the box 
will always display the agency account the user is currently logged into. When the user has completed their activities 
within one agency account, they may select another account from the Account Selection list box to perform work in. GInvoicing 
will then navigate the user to the selected account’s Welcome page. 

 

Your available agencies will be listed in alphabetical order in the drop-down menu. Each time you log into G-Invoicing, 
you will be logged into the first agency account listed in the drop-down menu as a default*. 

 

 



 

*If you are a user with multi-account access, user account lifecycle rules apply across all G-Invoicing agency accounts, 
and you do not need to log into each agency account to keep your access active in all of them. As long as you log in to 
G-Invoicing once every 120 days, your account will remain active in all agencies where access has been granted. 

 


Logging In For the First Time 

Upon account creation by an Agency Administrator, you will normally receive two system-generated e-mails from the 
United States Department of the Treasury Security Identification Manager (ISIM), the user provisioning system that 
grants access to G-Invoicing, notifying you of your access to G-Invoicing. The first email will contain your G-Invoicing 
User ID. The second email (which you should receive shortly after receiving your User ID email) will contain your 
temporary login password. Some users may receive a third email notifying them of a new Single Sign On (SSO)/FSLDAP 
account creation. 

 

Please note that the emails you will receive from ISIM contain a generic URL. That URL is for signing into the United 
States Department of the Treasury Single Sign On (SSO) system only , and may be used to access and update a user’s 
SSO account information, change their SSO password, etc. To log in to G-Invoicing, you will need to access one of the 
URLs noted below. 

 

If you do not receive one or more of the emails mentioned above, please be sure to check any Deleted or Junk mail 
folders you may have in your email system. If after checking your personal email folders you still cannot locate your 
User ID and/or temporary password emails for G-Invoicing, please contact the Treasury Support Center for assistance. 
(Note : If a user already had a SSO account established for them through another United States Department of the 
Treasury application or if they created it themselves before their user account in G-Invoicing was created, they will not 
receive any emails; users with existing SSO accounts should be able to log in to G-Invoicing with their existing SSO 
User ID and password after their G-Invoicing user account has been created.) 

 

CRITICAL NOTE : Your initial temporary password is good for up to 24 hours. If you do not log in to G-Invoicing within 
that time, please contact the Treasury Support Center and request that a new temporary password be generated for 
you. After access has been granted, all users are required to log into G-Invoicing at least once every 120 days to 
avoid losing application access. You must log in to the G-Invoicing application to ensure your account remains active. If 
you do not log in to G-Invoicing account during this time frame, your account will automatically become “inactive ”. 

 

As a courtesy, ISIM sends out reminders to individual users via email 30 days, 20 days, and 10 days out from their GInvoicing 
user account being disabled due to inactivity. If and when your G-Invoicing user account is disabled, ISIM will 
also email you a notification. 

 

New G-Invoicing User ID Email Example: 



 

New User Temporary Password Email Example: 

 




 

New Single Sign-On/FSLDAP Account Creation Email Example: 

 



 

How to Log In for the First Time: 

 

CRITICAL NOTE : After receiving the email with your temporary password, please wait no less than 15-30 minutes 
before attempting to log in to G-Invoicing. If you try and log in before that time, there is a chance that your account 
information in the system may not have fully updated, and you may lock yourself out of your account. 

Your initial temporary password is good for up to 24 hours. If you do not log in to G-Invoicing within that time, please 
contact the Treasury Support Center and request that a new temporary password be generated for you. 

1. Type in or copy and paste one of the following URLs into your browser: 

- Production: https://igt.fiscal.treasury.gov 

- QA (Training): https://qa.igt.fiscal.treasury.gov 

 

The sign in page will appear: 



 

2. In the User ID box, type the User ID you received via email. 

3. In the Password box, type the temporary password you received via email. 




4. Click Log In. 

5. On the Password Change page: 

- Type your temporary password in the Password field. 

- In the New Password field, create a new password using the password requirements on the screen. 

6. Retype your new password in the Confirm New Password field. 

7. Click Change Password . 

8. A message should display stating that your new password has been reset. Click Continue . 



 

9. The United States Department of the Treasury Single Sign On (SSO) System login page will appear: 



10. Enter your G-Invoicing User ID and the permanent password you just created into the User ID & Password 
section, and click on the Login button. 

11. The Treasury SSO Change Challenge/Response page will appear. Select at least three of the questions, and fill 
in the appropriate Response and Confirm Response fields for each of those questions. Your responses for each 
question must be unique, and must be at least 3 characters long. The information entered in the Response and Confirm 
Response fields must match exactly . 

12. After you have completed filling out the fields for your three questions, click on the Save My Questions & 
Responses button. 

13. The Change Shared Secret page will appear. Fill in both the Shared Secret and Confirm Shared Secret fields. 
Your shared secret must be at least 3 characters long, and the information entered in the Shared Secret and Confirm 
Shared Secret fields must match exactly . The Shared Secret is merely an extra level of security that you may need to 
reset your Treasury SSO password. 

14. After you have completed filling out the fields for your shared secret, click on the Save My Shared Secret button. 

15. The Change Challenge/Response Logout page will appear, and will ask you to please wait no less than 15 
minutes before attempting to log in to G-Invoicing. Click on the Logout button to log out of SSO. 




16. After logging out, you will be returned to the SSO login page. 

17. After waiting 15 minutes or more, please click on the appropriate G-Invoicing URL: 

- Production: https://igt.fiscal.treasury.gov 

- QA (Training): https://qa.igt.fiscal.treasury.gov 

18. Enter your User ID and password into the appropriate fields, then click on Log In. 

 

 


User Inactivity 

G-Invoicing user accounts are automatically marked Inactive if the user does not log into the G-Invoicing at least once 
every 120 days. The United States Department of the Treasury ISIM Single Sign-On (SSO ) account will remain active to 
access other Department of Treasury applications. If a user does not log into their Department of Treasury ISIM SSO 
account during a 13 month period (meaning they have not logged into ANY Treasury application), the ISIM SSO account 
will be marked inactive and all application access is removed. If the user should need access to a Treasury application at 
a future date, the ISIM SSO account will be reactivated if the production email address is the same when the original 
account was established. If the email address is different, a new Department of Treasury ISIM SSO will be created. 

 

It is critical that all users log in to G-Invoicing at least once every 120 days to ensure their access is not automatically 
revoked by ISIM due to inactivity. As a courtesy, ISIM sends out email reminders to all users 30 days, 20 days, and 10 
days prior to G-Invoicing access being revoked due to inactivity. When a user’s G-Invoicing access is revoked in ISIM, 
an email is also sent notifying the user they have lost their access to G-Invoicing. If a user’s G-Invoicing access is 
revoked from ISIM, an agency User Administrator will need to log in to G-Invoicing and re-enable the user’s account, 
provided the agency has at least one other user with the User Administrator role assigned to them. 

 

THE TREASURY SUPPORT CENTER (TSC) CANNOT RE-ENABLE ACCESS TO G-INVOICING. 


How to Request a Forgotten User ID 

How to Request a Forgotten User ID: 

 

1. From the G-Invoicing login page, click on the Forgot your User ID? link. The Treasury Single Sign On page 
appears. 

 

2. Click on the Forgot User ID button and follow the instructions displayed on the screen to obtain your User ID. 

 

 

 

 

 


How to Request a Forgotten Password 

How to Request a Forgotten Password: 

 

1. From the G-Invoicing login page, click on the Forgot your Password? link. The United States Department of the 
Treasury Single Sign On page will appear. 

 

2. Click on the Forgot Your Password button, and follow the instructions to reset your password. 

 

Your temporary password is good for up to 24 hours. If you do not log in to G-Invoicing with it within that time, you will 
need to request another temporary password following the above steps. If you do not receive an email containing a 
temporary password, please contact the Treasury Support Center to have one generated for you. 

 

Note : After resetting your password, you may be presented with the G-Invoicing sign in screen. If that should happen, 
please wait no less than 15 minutes before attempting to log in to G-Invoicing. If you try and log in soon after resetting 
your password, you may lock yourself out of the system. 

 

 


Managing Your Treasury Single Sign On (SSO) Account 

The United States Department of the Treasury Single Sign On (SSO) is a single account used to grant access to 
all the Treasury applications (i.e., G-Invoicing, IPAC, CARS, SAM, etc.). Users are able to manage personal information 
and change their password associated with their United States Department of the Treasury Single Sign On (SSO). This 
account provides a seamless login to all applications using one User ID. G-Invoicing roles and permissions are managed 
within the G-Invoicing application. 

Please be aware that the G-Invoicing Support Team does not manage or support Treasury SSO accounts. For assistance 
with Treasury SSO accounts, users may contact the Treasury Support Center at 1-877-440-9476. 

 

How to Update your Treasury Single Sign On Account: 

 

1. Type in or copy and paste one of the following URLs in your browser: 

- Production: https://isim.fiscal.treasury.gov/itim/self 

- QA/Training: https://isimpreprod.fiscal.treasury.gov/itim/self 

2. Enter your User ID and Password into the appropriate fields and click Login . 



3. Click on any of the available links to access your account information, and make any changes as needed. 



 

- Any changes made to your personal information in SSO (first or last names, email address, phone number, etc.) may 
not appear in G-Invoicing for up to 24 hours. 

 

Note : Logging into your SSO account is a separate action from logging into G-Invoicing itself. For example, if you log in 
to SSO to change your password, it is not a substitute for logging into G-Invoicing. ISIM Lifecycle rules (password 
expiration, account inactivity, login attempts, etc.) are managed by the SSO account. All users are required to log in to 
every application where access has been granted at least once every 120 days to avoid losing application access. You 
must log in to the G-Invoicing application to ensure your account remains active. If you do not log into G-Invoicing 
account during this timeframe, your account will automatically become “inactive”. If your G-Invoicing account becomes 


Inactive, the “User Administrator” within your agency will be able to re-activate your account. The Treasury Support 
Center (TSC) cannot re-enable your G-Invoicing access, access can only be established/re-enabled by a G-Invoicing 
User Administrator. If you do not log in to your Treasury SSO account for more than 13 months, you will need to 
contact the Treasury Support Center at 1-877-440-9476 to have your Treasury SSO account re-enabled. Once the SSO 
account is active, an agency User Administrator will be able to re-enable your access in G-Invoicing. 


About Intra-governmental Transactions 

G-Invoicing is a web-based application efficiently managing Intra-governmental Transactions from GT&Cs to IPAC 
payment notification between two federal agencies. The United States Department of the Treasury’s Bureau of the Fiscal 
Service offers G-Invoicing at no charge to all Federal agencies. The Bureau of the United States Department of the 
Treasury provides central payment services to Federal Program Agencies, operating the federal government's collections 
and deposit systems, providing government-wide accounting and reporting services, and managing the collection of 
delinquent debt owed to the government. 

 

G-Invoicing manages Intra-governmental reimbursable transactions, allows the establishment of trading partners, 
implements the IAA standard business process, and integrates with IPAC, while providing G-Invoicing users with the 
applicable permissions, visibility through the entire process. 

 

 

Prerequisites for Using Intra-governmental Transactions: 

 

Before creating GT&Cs and Orders in the User portion of G-Invoicing, please do the following in the order specified: 

 

1. Ensure that you have a G-Invoicing user account in an Active status within an overall agency account that is also in 
an Active status. 

2. To be able to create an Order as a Requesting Agency or a Servicing Agency, you are required to fully complete a 
GT&C with a trading partner and progress it to an Open for Orders status. 


GT&Cs 

 

A GT&C is the standard electronic format used for all reimbursable agreements between two agencies or within a 
shared service provider. Completing a GT&C is the first step in a three-part purchasing process between government 
agencies: 

 

1. The first part is the General Terms and Conditions (GT&C), which is the agreement reached between the Requesting 
Agency and the Servicing Agency to manage associated Orders, and which defines the agreement parameters. 

 

2. The second part is creating Orders. 

 

3. The third part is to fulfill Orders through Performance. 

 

The G-Invoicing system may generally be thought of as an electronic version of the United States Department of the 
Treasury 7600A and 7600B paper forms. 

Creating a GT&C: 

Either the Requesting Agency or the Servicing Agency can create an IAA GT&C. The agency that creates the GT&C is 
required to enter the other trading partner's agency name, Agency Location Code (ALC), and Group based on 
information provided by the other trading partner. 

 

To create an IAA GT&C, if you are the Servicing Agency, you enter your information via the Servicing Agency section of 
the application. If you are a Requesting Agency, you enter your information via the Requesting Agency section of the 
application. The information you enter into a GT&C in G-Invoicing corresponds to the information contained in the 
United States Department of the Treasury 7600A paper version of the agreement. To complete a GT&C in G-Invoicing, 
both parties are required to electronically approve the document. 

 

GT&Cs are required to be manually created through the G-Invoicing online interface. However, new and existing GT&Cs 
(along with any of their attachments) may be pulled from G-Invoicing into an agency's Enterprise Resource Planning 
(ERP) system as long as their agency accounts within G-Invoicing have been configured for that option. For more 
information on the relationship between your agency's ERP system and G-Invoicing, please contact the ERP team for 
your specific agency. 

Creating an Order off of a GT&C: 

A Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency may create an Order after both parties Approve the GT&C. 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Orders 

Orders in G-Invoicing correspond to the Interagency Agreement (IAA) Form 7600B. Orders provide specific details 
regarding the items/services the Requesting Agency is purchasing from the Servicing Agency, and any related funding 
information. 

A Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency may create individual orders manually in G-Invoicing, or may upload multiple 
orders simultaneously to G-Invoicing from an agency's Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system through an 
automated process that is configured in the Administration portion of G-Invoicing. In both cases, if subscribed to the 
Intragov Order Created or Changed Notification, G-Invoicing notifies the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency of a 
new Order creation or an existing Order modification. 

 


Performance Transactions 

A Performance Transaction is the exchange of data which indicates that the Intra-governmental Buy/Sell activity that 
has been agreed upon between Requesting and Servicing Agencies has been completed. 

The Performance portion of the Federal Intra-governmental Data Standards (FIDS) enforces the exchange of data which 
supports accurate and timely accounting entries. Performance Transactions provide key triggers for the recording of 
accounting entries relating to Accruals, Advances, and Liquidations. 

For additional information on Performance, Fiscal Service has published a G-Invoicing Program Guide for Basic 
Accounting and Reporting which defines the proper proprietary accounting treatment aligned to G-Invoicing transaction 
steps. 


Settlement 

Settlement is the transfer of funds from the Requesting Agency to the Servicing Agency via IPAC once the exchange of 
goods and/or services between the two parties has been completed through Performance . 

 

 

 

 

 


About IPAC Requests 

The Intra-governmental Payment and Collection (IPAC) system facilitates the transfer of funds for reimbursable 
activity between federal agencies, and allows all cash in transit to remain inside the government’s Fund Balance with 
the United States Department of the Treasury. IPAC’s primary role is to provide a standardized mechanism for fund 
transfers, while allowing agencies to share descriptive data with one another. IPAC also manages the settlement of 
funds, and stores historical transaction data. For more detailed information regarding IPAC, please visit here . 

 

The transfer of funds related to Orders is handled through the Performance process within G-Invoicing. 

 

 


Welcome Page 

After logging into G-Invoicing, all users will be presented with the Welcome Page. 

 

1) Users whose agencies have not been configured for GT&C Workflow will see something similar to the following: 

 



 

 

 

In the upper right-hand corner of the page, you will be presented with the following information: 

 

- User ID: Your personal G-Invoicing User ID that you use to log in to the system with. 

 

- Environment : The G-Invoicing environment that you are currently logged into. 

 

- Version : The current G-Invoicing version deployed to the environment that you are currently logged into. 

 

The long, white drop-down menu just below your login information is the Agency Selection Menu . If you should 
happen to have user accounts for more than one agency within G-Invoicing, you may switch to another agency's 
information by selecting a different agency name from this drop-down menu. 

 

To the left of the Agency Selection drop-down menu, you will be provided with the following drop-down menus 
depending on the roles and permissions you hold in your G-Invoicing user account: 

 

- Home : Clicking on this will always return you to the G-Invoicing Welcome Page. 

- Requesting Agency : This drop-down menu provides links to Requesting Agency GT&Cs, Orders, Performance, and a 
quick link to the Create GT&C page. 

 

- Servicing Agency :This drop-down menu provides links to Servicing Agency GT&Cs, Orders, Performance, and a quick 
link to the Create GT&C page. 

- Administration : This drop-down menu will only display for users who hold G-Invoicing Administrator rights in their 
user accounts (i.e., User Administrator, Organization Administrator, etc.), and may provide links to the Manage 
Organization Groups, Manage (Agency) Accounts, Manage Users, and Manage System Users pages, depending on the 
specific Administrator roles a user holds and how their overall agency account is configured. 

 

- Reports : The Reports link near the top of each page in G-Invoicing will be visible to all users. However, only 
Performance-related reports are available to run at this time, and only users who hold Performance-related Roles in 
their user accounts will have access to the current Performance reporting functionality from the Reports section. 
Reporting functionality will be available for other documents (GT&Cs and Orders) out of the Reports section in future GInvoicing 
releases. The Reports section in G-Invoicing provides a more advanced reporting capability than what is 


offered from the Export Summary and Export Details options on the document Summary List pages. 

 

- Help : The drop-down menu will display various options for viewing online help , depending on the roles and 
permissions you hold in your G-Invoicing user account. From the Help menu, users may also access the User Profile 
box, Glossary of User Roles page, ALC Search box, and Agency Release Notes from the most recent G-Invoicing 
deployment. 

 

- Log Off : Logs the user out of their current G-Invoicing session. 

 

 

In the News and Information section, users may review G-Invoicing-related news items. Normally, these will be 
notices regarding scheduled future maintenance , or any information dealing with known system issues. To view an 
entire message, click on the arrow to the immediate left of any message title. After reviewing the message, you may 
collapse it by clicking on the arrow once again. 

 

In the User Profile Information section* on the right side of the page, users may review all of the information 
currently configured for their own G-Invoicing User Account, up to and including: 

 

- Their personal contact information 

 

- The name and email address of the agency User Administrator** assigned to their user account 

 

- The Groups they are assigned to, and the Roles they have been assigned within those Groups 

 

*Users may also bring up their User Profile Information on any page within G-Invoicing by clicking on the Help dropdown 
menu near the upper right corner of the page, and then selecting User Profile . The User Profile Information 
box will appear: 

 



 

You may close the User Profile Information box at any time by clicking on the "X" in the top right corner of the box. 

 

**Please be advised that users who are named as Master Administrators in G-Invoicing will not have their User 
Administrator's name or contact information displayed in their User Profiles. If a Master Administrator should need to 
know who their User Administrator is, they should contact the Treasury Support Center for assistance. 


 

 

 

2) Users whose agencies have been configured for GT&C Workflow and who hold the GT&C Workflow Reviewer role in 
their G-Invoicing user accounts will see something similar to the following on their home pages: 

 



 

 

The Welcome screen for users whose agencies have been configured for GT&C Workflow will see all of the items 
mentioned above, plus the following: 

 

- Work Basket : Displays the number of Critical Work Items* that need to be addressed, Work Items In Progress , 
and Completed Work Items . 

 

- You may click on the GT&C# of any item in the Work Basket to access a GT&C. 

 

*A GT&C is considered a Critical Item when it is 4 days or less of meeting its Service Level Agreement (SLA) date. 
The SLA date is an element of Workflow routing rules, which are configured by agency GT&C Workflow Configuration 
Managers when they build out a Workflow Sequence. Any questions regarding SLA dates should be addressed to one of 
your agency's GT&C Workflow Configuration Managers. 

 

 

For a more detailed list of GT&C Workflow items, click on the Go To Work Items Home Page link in the right-hand 
corner of the Work Basket section to bring up the Work Item Dashboard : 

 



 

- You may click on the GT&C# of any item on the Work Item Dashboard to access a GT&C. 

 

- Each GT&C# presented in the Work Basket will display either REQ or SRV to the right of it, which indicates which 


trading partner needs to perform the work: The Requesting Agency or the Servicing Agency. This is especially helpful to 
agencies that create documents where they are named as both the Requesting Agency and Servicing Agency on. 

 

- The gray ovals with white numbers in them that display to the right of any GT&C# in either the Work Basket or the 
Work Item Dashboard indicate the number of days left until the SLA for the item expires. Hovering over the gray ovals 
with your cursor will display a short message: 

 




GT&C Workflow 

Through GT&C Workflow , agencies may route GT&Cs to specific Organization Groups within their own agency accounts 
based on rules that the agencies create and manage themselves. 

- GT&C Workflow is only available for GT&Cs in an Internal Draft or Shared Draft status at this time. Additional GT&C 
statuses will be available for Workflow in a future G-Invoicing release. 

- Users who have been tasked by their agency to Review a GT&C before it is Shared with a trading partner must hold 
the GT&C Workflow Reviewer role in their G-Invoicing User Account, and that role must be assigned to the agency 
Organization Group that has been assigned to receive the GT&C through the agency's Workflow routing rules. In 
addition, users must also hold at least the Requesting Agency GT&C Viewer or Servicing Agency GT&C Viewer roles in 
their user account to be able to access GT&Cs affected by Workflow (holding either the Requesting Agency or Servicing 
Agency GT&C Creator or GT&C Manager roles will also grant access to GT&Cs that fall under Workflow). The Reviewer 
must have at least one of those GT&C-related roles assigned in the Organizational Group hierarchy for their agency 
(preferably at the top of the organization) which will grant them access to the GT&Cs they may be assigned to review. 
Users who require the GT&C Workflow Reviewer role should contact the agency User Administrator assigned to their 
user account for additional information and/or actual assignment of the role. 

- For any questions regarding an agency's Workflow configuration and routing rules, users should contact one or more 
of their agency's GT&C Workflow Configuration Managers for assistance. 


About Notifications 

An agency User Administrator determines which email Notifications you can receive from G-Invoicing documents based 
on your roles and permissions, and can add or remove Notification subscriptions from your user account. To request a 
notification be assigned to or removed from your user account, please contact one of your agency's G-Invoicing User 
Administrators . 

 

Note : G-Invoicing only sends notifications to the email address associated with your User ID. G-Invoicing does not send 
notifications to multiple email addresses or group email boxes. 

 

 

The information in the table below describes the currently available Notification types: 

 

Notification Name 

Description 

GT&C Created or Changed Notification 

G-Invoicing sends this notification to either the 
subscribed Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency user 
when a GT&C creation or modification occurs by either 
agency. 

Order Created or Changed Notification 

G-Invoicing sends this notification to either the 
subscribed Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency user 
when an Order creation or modification occurs by either 
agency. 

Performance Created 

G-Invoicing sends this notification to either the 
subscribed Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency user 
when a Performance creation occurs by either agency. 

GT&C Workflow Item Assigned 
Notification 

G-Invoicing sends this notification to either the 
subscribed Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency user 
when action is required on a GT&C based on Workflow 
rules. 

 

This notification is only available to agencies that have 
GT&C Workflow configured in their agency accounts. 

 

The table below outlines which users will receive notifications based on the actions taken on any given GT&C and the 
Role they hold in their G-Invoicing user accounts: 

 

 




 

 

 

 


Glossary of G-Invoicing User Roles 

A list of Roles and their descriptions that are currently available to be assigned to individual user accounts within GInvoicing 
is available for viewing. To have a Role assigned or removed from your G-Invoicing user account, please 
speak to the agency User Administrator currently assigned to your user account. 

To Display the Glossary of G-Invoicing User Roles : 

 

1. Log in to G-Invoicing. 

 

2. Click on the Help drop-down menu located near the top right portion of the page and select Glossary of User 
Roles . 

 

3. The Glossary of User Roles will display. 

 

- You may search/filter for specific roles or descriptions by using the search fields directly below the Role Name and Role 
Description column headers. For example, if you wanted to search for all of the Role Descriptions that include the word 
"initial" in them, you would type "initial" in the Role Description search field: 

 




Searching for an Agency ALC 

Before adding or removing an Agency Location Code (ALC) to a document in G-Invoicing, a user may want to view a list 
of all agency ALCs currently available in G-Invoicing. 

How to Search for an Agency ALC: 

 

1. Log in to G-Invoicing. 

 

2. In the upper right-hand corner of the page, click on the Help drop-down menu. 

 

3. Select ALC Search . 

 

4. The ALC Search screen will appear. 

 

- The information in each column may be toggled from increasing or decreasing order by clicking on the up and down 
arrows in each column header. 

 

- To filter the results, use the search bars with the magnifying glass icons below each column header. For example, if 
you wanted to only display all of the ALCs that used the name "Department of Justice", you would type in "Justice" in 
the search field under the ALC Name column: 

 



 

To close out the ALC Search, click on the "X" in the upper right-hand corner of the ALC Search screen. 

 

Please note that ALCs belonging to agencies that have not been onboarded to G-Invoicing may be assigned to the 
Trading Partner Queue agency account. 


Trading Partner Queue and Trading Partner Directory 

The Trading Partner Queue (TPQ) is a G-Invoicing agency account made up of Federal Trading Partners (aka US 
Government Agencies) that are in queue/waiting to onboard to G-Invoicing. The TPQ account is managed by the United 
States Department of the Treasury Bureau of the Fiscal Service and provides agencies with existing accounts in GInvoicing 
the opportunity to initiate General Terms & Conditions (GT&Cs) agreements with their missing trading 
partners. 

At this time, any GT&C created with an agency in the Trading Partner Queue cannot progress beyond a Shared Draft 
status. These Shared Draft GT&Cs will be retained in G-Invoicing and will be made available to the missing trading 
partner when their agency’s account has been created in G-Invoicing. After that time, the Shared Draft GT&Cs can 
continue to be brokered by both trading partners. 

How to Create a GT&C with a Trading Partner Whose ALC is Located in the Trading Partner Queue : 

 

1. From the Partner Information portion of any given GT&C that you are creating, click on the Agency Account field 
in either the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency sections and select Trading Partner Queue from the drop-down 
menu. 

 

2. Select the appropriate Group Name . 

 

3. Select the proper ALC* for the agency you would like to create a GT&C with. 

 

 

*You may view a list of available ALCs in G-Invoicing at any time from the ALC Search function. 

 

The Trading Partner Directory (TPD) is a document maintained outside of G-Invoicing. The TPD includes up-to-date 
information on: 

 

- Federal Trading Partners’ G-Invoicing onboarding status 

- IGT Buy/Sell Agency Location Codes (ALCs) 

- Agency IDs (AIDs) 

- G-Invoicing agency account names 

 

The Trading Partner Directory may only be accessed via the US Office of Management and Budget (OMB) MAX website . 
For convenience, you may click here to reach the Trading Partner Directory within the OMB MAX site. Please note that 
you must have an OMB MAX account to be able to log into the site, and you may need additional software (i.e., Tableau 
Reader) to view certain documents. Users who do not have an OMB MAX account may request one from the MAX home 
page. 

For any OMB MAX-related account or login issues, please contact the OMB MAX team directly at: 

- Phone: 202-395-6860 

- Email: maxsupport@max.gov 

- OMB MAX Team Support Hours: M-F, 8:30AM-9:00PM EST / Sat-Sun, 9:00AM to 6:00PM EST 

For any questions or concerns regarding Trading Partner Directory content, please email the United States Department 
of the Treasury Bureau of the Fiscal Service directly at igt@fiscal.treasury.gov 


About GT&Cs 

The Interagency Agreement (IAA) form 7600A is the recommended standard paper form used for reimbursable 
agreements between two agencies. Patterned after the IAA 7600A form, the G-Invoicing GT&C (General Terms and 
Conditions) is an electronic form that contains the agreement sections of the IAA, and supports all related Orders. The 
agency that is purchasing goods or services is the Requesting Agency. The agency providing the goods or services is the 
Servicing Agency. Either the Requesting Agency or the Servicing Agency can initiate GT&Cs. The Requesting Agency 
and Servicing Agency work together to approve the GT&C. To complete the form, both parties must electronically 
approve the GT&C. 

 

The agency creating the GT&C will be responsible for entering the trading partner's name, their Agency ID (AID), and 
their ALC. 

 

A brief representation of the Intra-governmental (IGT) Buy/Sell Transaction Lifecycle: 



 

The information entered on the GT&C pages corresponds to the information contained in the paper version of the 7600A 
form except for Organization Groups (also known simply as "Groups"). Groups are the primary way agencies grant 
user access to documents within G-Invoicing, and are normally based on each agency's organizational needs. 

 

In addition, the Cost Center, Business Unit, and Department ID fields on a GT&C are free form and optional, and may 
also be used by agencies for specific purposes unique to them. For example: 

 

- Business Units can be a segment of a company, such as accounting. 

- Cost Centers can be units within an organization where managers are responsible for associated costs and for 
adhering to a budget. (Cost Centers are an expense for the organization.) 

- Department IDs can be a part of a larger organization with a specific responsibility or devoted to one of several 
major tasks 

 

G-Invoicing provides some of the required information for the agency based on the partnerships the agency has already 
created, such as the ALC and Agency ID, thus reducing the risk of data entry error. However, if either agency has more 
than one ALC or has multiple Groups, the agency must select the appropriate codes when creating the GT&C. 

 

To create a GT&C, an Agency Administrator must assign an agency user at least one of the following roles: 

- Requesting or Servicing GT&C Manager (Permits an agency user to Create, Edit, Delete, Modify, View, and Share 
GT&C agreements.) 

- Requesting or Servicing GT&C Creator (Permits an agency user to Create, Edit, Delete, Modify, and View GT&C 
agreements.) 


 

In addition, each GT&C-related role that is granted to a user must have at least one Group assigned to it. For additional 
information regarding user roles, Groups, and GT&C access, please contact one of your agency’s User Administrators. 

 

Note: GT&Cs must be created manually through the online G-Invoicing application User Interface (UI). They may not 
be created through an agency's Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) program. 

 

 

 

About GT&C Access : 

 

A user's ability to access, view, and work on existing GT&Cs is based on a number of factors: 

- The GT&C uses a Primary Group that the user has access to within their own agency. The user must be assigned to 
that Group through their G-Invoicing user account, and must also have one or more GT&C-related Roles assigned to 
that Group in their user account. 

- The creating agency must share a GT&C with the trading partner before the trading partner has access to the 
document 

- Whether the Document Inheritance Indicator (DII) on the GT&C is set to Yes or No* 

- Users will not have access to GT&Cs that have been Deleted. 

 

 

There may be situations where a user has the ability to view a GT&C, but not perform any work on it. These GT&Cs will 
display an “O” icon in the user's GT&C Summary List(s) to the right of their GT&C number: 

 

 

- Users are automatically granted view access to GT&Cs that are created from Groups above and below the user’s 
assigned Group(s) within their agency’s overall Organization Group hierarchy. Whether or not they have the ability to 
perform work on those GT&Cs will depend on how their agency has configured their agency account. For instance, the 
screen shot below shows a Group hierarchy from an agency account. In this example, an agency has a user that is only 
assigned to one Group within their agency, Detroit , and they have one of the GT&C Manager roles assigned to that 
Group in their user account. The user in this example may view and perform work on any GT&C that uses the Group 
from their agency called Detroit on it as the Primary Group: 




 

 

- The sample user in this case would be able to view GT&Cs that use the Groups called HQ, North, or Ann Arbor on them 
as the Primary Group, but they would not have the ability to perform any work on them. 

 

- The Groups that do not have a red circle or green rectangle surrounding them are Groups that the user in our example 
would not have any access to because they are not above or below Detroit in their agency's Group hierarchy. 

 

*In the event a GT&C has its DII set to ”No”, a user will have the ability to create an Order off of the GT&C if: 

- The user holds one or more of the appropriate Order-related Roles in their user account 

- The user's appropriate Order-Related Roles are assigned to a Group that is used as a Subordinate Group on the 
GT&C. 

GT&Cs that meet the Subordinate Group criteria noted above will also display an “O” icon next to their GT&C numbers in 
a user's GT&C Summary List(s). 


Requesting Agency GT&C Summary Page 

As the Requesting Agency, you will use the GT&C Summary Page to view and manage all of the GT&Cs you have 
established with Servicing Agencies. 

 

How to Access GT&Cs Within G-Invoicing : 

1. Click on the Requesting Agency drop-down menu. 

2. Click on GT&C . 

The GT&C Summary Page will appear. From this page, you should be able to access GT&Cs based on the Roles and 
Groups that have been assigned to your G-Invoicing user account. Depending on the number of GT&Cs any given 
agency has entered into the system, it may take a few moments for the list of GT&Cs to fully load. If a giant blank 
space appears under the GT&C sub-tab after you click on it, and none of the GT&C columns, rows, or buttons appear 
like they do in the screen shot below, please click here for instructions. 



The information displayed on the GT&C Summary Page is organized into eight default columns that include GT&Cs that 
are in any status. To narrow the amount of GT&Cs that are visible on the summary page at any given time, to adjust 
how the GT&Cs are organized on the page, or to display additional columns, please see the Searching for GT&Cs 
section. 

GT&C Summary List 

The following table describes the information displayed on the GT&C Summary List: 

 

Column Name 

Description 

GT&C# 

Click on any GT&C# to view the agreement. 

 

Once a GT&C is saved for the very first time, the system will 
auto-generate a GT&C Number for the document. G-Invoicing 
auto-generates the GT&C number in the format of A (literal), 
plus 4 digits for the current calendar year and month, plus 3 
digits for the Requesting Agency ID, plus 3 digits for the 
Servicing Agency ID, plus 6 digits for a sequence number 
(which starts at 1 and increments for every new GT&C). The 
sequence number restarts every MONTH at 1. The 
modification number appears after the decimal, and increases 
with each change to the GT&C. For example, GT&C# A1410- 


010-020-000001.2 is a document that has been modified 
twice. 

 

A paperclip icon displaying to the right of a GT&C# indicates 
that the GT&C has one or more attachments added to it. 

 

An "O" icon displaying to the right of a GT&C# indicates a 
document that a user has access to view, but not has 
permission to perform any work on, based on the Primary 
Group used on the GT&C and how the Organization Group 
hierarchy is configured for any given agency account. In the 
event a Group a user has access to through their user account 
is used as a Subordinate Group on a GT&C, a user will be able 
to view and possibly create an Order off of it depending on 
the Role(s) they hold in their user account. 

 



 

Title 

The descriptive name given to any GT&C by a Requesting or 
Servicing Agency. 

Agreement Start Date 

The Agreement Start Date represents the date the agreement 
between two agencies begins. 

Agreement End Date 

The Agreement End Date represents the date the agreement 
between two agencies ends. 

Trading Partner 

The name of the Servicing Agency on the GT&C. 

Requesting Group 

The name of the Requesting Agency Organization Group that 
the GT&C is being associated with. 

Servicing Group 

The name of the Servicing Agency Organization Group that 
the GT&C is being associated with. 

Estimated Total Amount 

The sum of the Total Direct Cost Amount of the GT&C plus 
Total Overhead Fees and Charges Amount of the GT&C, if 
any. 

Total Remaining Amount 

Total remaining amount to obligate. 

Status 

Displays the current status of the GT&C: 

Internal Draft - A saved Draft of the GT&C that can be 
edited or completed at a later time. (Note: GT&Cs that are in 
an Internal Draft status are not visible to Servicing Agencies.) 
An "R" icon next to the words Internal Draft in the Summary 
List Status column means that the Internal Draft was once 
Shared with a trading partner, but the GT&C was returned to 
the agency that created it without being Rejected. 

 

Shared Draft - The agency that created the GT&C has sent a 
draft of the GT&C to the trading partner for review 

Pending Approval - The Requesting Agency and/or Servicing 
Agency has yet to fully approve the GT&C. 

- When a GT&C is in a Pending Approval status, indicators in 
the Status column will display whether or not Initial or Final 
Approvers from either the Requesting (Req) or Servicing (Srv) 
Agencies have taken action on the GT&C: 

 

- One check : GT&C has been Initially Approved 

- Two checks : GT&C has been Finally Approved 


- One X: Has not been approved by the Final Approver 

- Two Xs: Has not been approved by either the Initial or Final 
Approver 

Open For Orders - The GT&C is currently active, and can be 
used to obtain goods and/or services 

Rejected – An agency Approver has rejected the GT&C 

Closed - The GT&C is no longer available to take action on. 


Servicing Agency GT&C Summary 

As the Servicing Agency, you will use the GT&C Summary Page to view and manage all of the GT&Cs you have 
established with Requesting Agencies. 

 

How to Access GT&Cs Within G-Invoicing : 

1. Click on the Servicing Agency drop-down menu. 

2. Click on GT&C . 

The GT&C Summary Page will appear. From this page, you should be able to access GT&Cs based on the Roles and 
Groups that have been assigned to your G-Invoicing user account. Depending on the number of GT&Cs any given 
agency has entered into the system, it may take a few moments for the list of GT&Cs to fully load. If a giant blank 
space appears under the GT&C sub-tab after you click on it, and none of the GT&C columns, rows, or buttons appear 
like they do in the screen shot below, please click here for instructions. 



The information displayed on the GT&C Summary Page is organized into eight default columns that include GT&Cs that 
are in any status. To narrow the amount of GT&Cs that are visible on the summary page at any given time, to adjust 
how the GT&Cs are organized on the page, or to display additional columns, please see the Searching for GT&Cs 
section. 

GT&C Summary List 

The following table describes the information displayed on the GT&C Summary List: 

 

Column Name 

Description 

GT&C# 

Click on any GT&C# to view the agreement. 

 

Once a GT&C is saved for the very first time, the system will 
auto-generate a GT&C Number for the document. G-Invoicing 
auto-generates the GT&C number in the format of A (literal), 
plus 4 digits for the current calendar year and month, plus 3 
digits for the Requesting Agency ID, plus 3 digits for the 
Servicing Agency ID, plus 6 digits for a sequence number 
(which starts at 1 and increments for every new GT&C). The 
sequence number restarts every MONTH at 1. The 
modification number appears after the decimal, and increases 
with each change to the GT&C. For example, GT&C# A1410- 


010-020-000001.2 is a document that has been modified 
twice. 

 

A paperclip icon displaying to the right of a GT&C# indicates 
that the GT&C has one or more attachments added to it. 

 

An "O" icon displaying to the right of a GT&C# indicates a 
document that a user has access to view, but not has 
permission to perform any work on, based on the Primary 
Group used on the GT&C and how the Organization Group 
hierarchy is configured for any given agency account. In the 
event a Group a user has access to through their user account 
is used as a Subordinate Group on a GT&C, a user will be able 
to view and possibly create an Order off of it depending on 
the Role(s) they hold in their user account. 

 



 

Title 

The descriptive name given to any GT&C by a Requesting or 
Servicing Agency. 

Agreement Start Date 

The Agreement Start Date represents the date the agreement 
between two agencies begins. 

Agreement End Date 

The Agreement End Date represents the date the agreement 
between two agencies ends. 

Trading Partner 

The name of the Requesting Agency on the GT&C. 

Requesting Group 

The name of the Requesting Agency Organization Group that 
the GT&C is being associated with. 

Servicing Group 

The name of the Servicing Agency Organization Group that 
the GT&C is being associated with. 

Estimated Total Amount 

The sum of the Total Direct Cost Amount of the GT&C plus 
Total Overhead Fees and Charges Amount of the GT&C, if 
any. 

Total Remaining Amount 

Total remaining amount to obligate. 

Status 

Displays the current status of the GT&C: 

Internal Draft - A saved Draft of the GT&C that can be 
edited or completed at a later time. (Note: GT&Cs that are in 
an Internal Draft status are not visible to Servicing Agencies.) 
An "R" icon next to the words Internal Draft in the Summary 
List Status column means that the Internal Draft was once 
Shared with a trading partner, but the GT&C was returned to 
the agency that created it without being Rejected. 

 

Shared Draft - The agency that created the GT&C has sent a 
draft of the GT&C to the trading partner for review 

Pending Approval - The Requesting Agency and/or Servicing 
Agency has yet to fully approve the GT&C. 

- When a GT&C is in a Pending Approval status, indicators in 
the Status column will display whether or not Initial or Final 
Approvers from either the Requesting (Req) or Servicing (Srv) 
Agencies have taken action on the GT&C: 

 

- One check : GT&C has been Initially Approved 

- Two checks : GT&C has been Finally Approved 


- One X: Has not been approved by the Final Approver 

- Two Xs: Has not been approved by either the Initial or Final 
Approver 

Open For Orders - The GT&C is currently active, and can be 
used to obtain goods and/or services 

Rejected – An agency Approver has rejected the GT&C 

Closed - The GT&C is no longer available to take action on. 


Searching for a GT&C 

 

From the GT&C Summary Page , you may search for GT&Cs based on a variety of criteria and may use filters to 
narrow the search results even further. 

 

How to Search for GT&Cs: 

 

1. Click on either the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus. 

 

2. Click on GT&C . The GT&C Summary Page should appear. (Note: Depending on the number of GT&Cs any given 
agency has recorded in the system, it may take a few moments for the list of GT&Cs to load on the Summary Page.) 

 



 

3. Use the boxes beneath each Column name (GT&C#, Title, Status, etc.) to filter the GT&Cs that appear on the page. 
For example, if you are searching for a single GT&C number such as A2107-017-0017-0005796, you can just type in the 
number "6" in the box below the GT&C# column name, and the system will display all of your GT&Cs that contain “6” in 
their numbers: 




 

 

Note : If you are attempting to search by a full GT&C#, be sure to leave off the decimal point and anything after the 
decimal point. For example, if you are searching for GT&C# A2004-020-020-0002796.1, you would just enter A2004- 
020-020-0002796 into the search field. The system will not recognize a GT&C# with a decimal point. 

 

 

- The Status column includes a drop-down menu that allows you to filter on a specific GT&C status: 

 




 

 

- You may select more than one specific Status value at a time. 

 

If you wish to narrow the number of columns visible on the GT&C Summary Page, click on the Selectable Columns 
box and select/deselect the columns you would like to add or remove from view: 

 



 

Note: If you decide to filter a GT&C search based on a given column value and then decide to hide that column from 
the GT&C Summary Page, the system will still retain the search filter, even though it may not be visible on the screen. 
For example, if you performed a search based on a specific Title, then decided to remove the Title column from your 
view on the screen, the system will still display the search results based on the specific Title you have selected as filter. 
In addition, if you select one or more filters on the GT&C Summary Page, move to another page, then return to the 
GT&C Summary Page within the same log in session, G-Invoicing will retain the filters selected on the GT&C Summary 
List page. 

To clear out all Filters you may have selected, click on the Clear Filters button located on top right portion of the GT&C 
Summary List box. 

 

Additional items to keep in mind: 


- The up and down arrows located to the right of the column names allow you to arrange the information that appears 
in the columns by alphanumerical order (A-to-Z/Z-to-A or lowest-to-highest/highest-to-lowest). 

- If you select one or more filters on the GT&C Summary Page, move to another page within the system, then return to 
the GT&C Summary Page within the same log in session, G-Invoicing will retain the filters selected on the GT&C 
Summary List page. 

- GT&Cs in any Draft status will only appear for the agency that created it. For example, if a GT&C was created by a 
Requesting Agency, it will not appear in the Summary List for the Servicing Agency until it is Shared with them. 

- GT&Cs that you have access to if the Document Inheritance Indicator (DII) on them is set to "No" will display an "O" 
icon* to the right of their GT&C#: 

 



 

*An "O" icon displaying to the right of a GT&C# indicates a document that a user has access to view, but does not have 
the permission to perform any work on, based on the Primary Group used on the GT&C and how the Organization Group 
hierarchy is configured for any given agency account. In the event a Group a user has access to through their user 
account is used as a Subordinate Group on a GT&C, a user will be able to view and possibly create an Order off of it 
depending on the Role(s) they hold in their user account. 


Viewing GT&C Details 

To view additional details for each GT&C, Requesting and Servicing Agencies may click on any GT&C# from the GT&C 
Summary Page. As a default, the Partner Information section for the GT&C will display first. Each section of the GT&C 
will appear on the left-hand side of the page: 

 



 

 

Click on any of the section names on the left-hand side of the page to access the following: 

 

Section Name 

Description 

Partner Information 

Displays ALCs for the Requesting and Servicing Agencies, along with any Group 
or Reference Data (i.e., Cost Center, Business Unit, and Department ID) 
information used on the GT&C. 

Header/Detail 

Displays information such as Requesting Agency and Servicing Agency Tracking 
Numbers, Termination Days, Agreement Type, Total Direct Cost Amount, etc. 

Agreement 
Information 

Displays information such as the Explanation of Overhead Fees and Charges, 
Roles, Restrictions, Clauses, etc. 

Approvals 

Displays the contact information for the GT&C Initial and Final Approvers. 


Creating, Saving, and Sending a GT&C On For Approval 

There are four major parts to creating a GT&C in G-Invoicing: 

Part 1: The agency (Requesting or Servicing) creating the form completes the Partner Information section (i.e., 
GT&C Title, Agreement Start and End Dates, Agency Name, ALCs, etc.). 

Part 2: From the Header/Details section, the initiating agency adds the details to the GT&C (Termination Days, 
Agreement Type, Total Direct Cost Amount, etc.). From the Agreement Information section, agencies may enter 
information such as Scope, Restrictions, and Clauses. Once those two sections are completed, the GT&C is Shared with 
the partner agency; once the document is Shared, the initiating agency will generally not be able to edit the GT&C until 
it is either sent back to it by the trading partner to be corrected, is Rejected during the Approval process, or moves to 
an Open for Orders status. If your agency's G-Invoicing account has been configured with an Active version of GT&C 
Workflow , and the GT&C itself falls within the Routing Rules of the active Workflow, the document will be required to 
be Reviewed and Accepted by one or more members of your agency before it may be Shared with the trading 
partner. 

Part 3: The trading partner (the agency that did not initiate the GT&C) enters their information on the GT&C before 
submitting it for Approval . 

Part 4: The Requesting and Servicing Agencies must both electronically Approve the GT&C (please see the topics 
Approving or Rejecting a GT&C for further information). 

Note: The following procedures explain how to create a GT&C as the Requesting Agency , as it is the most common 
way GT&Cs are created. To create a GT&C as a Servicing Agency , you would log in to G-Invoicing, then click on the 
Servicing Agency sub-menu. Once the Servicing Agency GT&C Summary Page appears, you would follow the 
instructions noted below. Please note that while the instructions for creating a GT&C as a Servicing Agency are very 
similar to the ones as a Requesting Agency, some fields will not be available to the Servicing Agency as they are meant 
to be filled out by the Requesting Agency only. 

CRITICAL NOTE : During the create process, GT&Cs do not self-save. If you are creating a GT&C and should happen to 
move out of the GT&C sub-tab without saving the document as a Draft first, the GT&C will not be retained, and you will 
need to start the document over from scratch. 

- For instructions on how to save a GT&C as a Draft as a Requesting Agency , please see here . 

- For instructions on how to save a GT&C as a Draft that was initiated by the Partner Agency , please see here . 

 

Once a GT&C is saved for the very first time, the system will auto-generate a GT&C Number for the document. GInvoicing 
auto-generates the GT&C number in the format of A (literal), plus 4 digits for the current calendar year and 
month, plus 3 digits for the Requesting Agency ID, plus 3 digits for the Servicing Agency ID, plus 6 digits for a sequence 
number (which starts at 1 and increments for every new GT&C). The sequence number restarts every MONTH at 1. The 
modification number appears after the decimal, and increases with each change to the GT&C. For example, GT&C# 
A1410-010-020-000001.2 is a document that has been modified twice. 

 

 

How to Create a GT&C as the Requesting Agency – Part 1: 

 

Note : The agency that initiates the GT&C fills out Requesting Agency and Servicing Agency information to begin the 
GT&C. 

- Please be aware that the Total Estimated Amount and Total Remaining Amount will not display near the top right 
portion of the GT&C page until you enter a numerical value in to the Total Direct Cost Amount field located in the 
Header/Detail section of the GT&C and save the document as an Internal Draft (see How to Create the GT&C as the 
Requesting Agency – Part 2 for more information). 

 

1. From the Requesting Agency drop-down menu, click on GT&C . The GT&C Summary Page will display. 

2. Click the Create GT&C button at the top of the GT&C Summary List . The Create GT&C user interface (UI) will 
appear. As default, the Create GT&C function will display the Partner Information section of the GT&C first. The name 
of your own agency will be auto-filled in the Agency Account field. 


 



 

3. In the GT&C Title field near the top of the page, please enter a descriptive name for the GT&C. (Maximum of 200 
alpha-numeric characters.) Neither G-Invoicing nor the United States Department of the Treasury requires a specific 
naming convention for GT&C Titles, however, individual agencies may have their own policies regarding this. If you have 
any questions about what should be entered into this field, please contact one of your agency's G-Invoicing 
administrators directly. 

4. Click on the empty Agreement Start Date field. When the calendar box appears, select the appropriate date. You 
may use the arrows near the top of the calendar box to skip ahead to a future month, or to go back to a previous 
month. You may also click on the Month and Year drop-down menus to select specific a month or year. Alternatively, 
you may enter a date by hand in the open field at the top of the calendar box using this format: yyyy-mm-dd . If you 
would like to select today's date, click on the Today button located in the lower left corner of the calendar box. To 
remove any calendar information you may have chosen, click on the Clear button in the lower right corner of the 
calendar box. 

If the month, year, and arrows are not visible to you at the top of the calendar box, please lower the zoom level on your 
internet browser and/or computer screen. 

- Note : Backdating GT&Cs is allowed (i.e., you may create a GT&C using a start date that is before the current date). 

5. Click on the empty Agreement End Date field. When the calendar box appears, select the appropriate date. You 
may use the arrows near the top of the calendar box to skip ahead to a future month, or to go back to a previous 
month. You may also click on the Month and Year drop-down menus to select a specific month or year. Alternatively, 
you may enter a date by hand in the open field at the top of the calendar box using this format: yyyy-mm-dd . If you 
would like to select today's date, click on the Today button located in the lower left corner of the calendar box. To 
remove any calendar information you may have chosen, click on the Clear button in the lower right corner of the 
calendar box. 

If the month, year, and arrows are not visible to you at the top of the calendar box, please lower the zoom level on your 
internet browser and/or computer screen. 

6. In the Requesting Agency sub-section, your own agency name should automatically be filled in the Agency 
Account field. 

7. Click on the drop-down menu arrow in the Group Name & Description field. (The Group Name is displayed first, 
and the Description is followed by a dash "-".) Instead of searching through the entire list of Group Names & 


Descriptions, you may search for a Group Name or Description by entering it in the Search bar field with the magnifying 
glass icon that appears right above the list of Group Names & Descriptions. 

In addition, clicking on the Org button to the right of the Group Name & Description field will display a tree view of the 
agency's Organizational Group structure: 



 

If you would like to search for a specific Group Name to see where if falls in an agency Organization Group structure, 
type in the name of the Group in the search field that says "Filter By Group Name" at the top of the Group list. 

 

- Note : If a Group does not appear for you in the Group Name & Description field and you believe it should, please 
contact one of your agency's User Administrators for assistance. 

 

8. The Document Inheritance Indicator (DII) is set to Yes as a default. The DII setting provides flexibility in 
allowing broader access to GT&Cs through the Child/Descendant Groups within your agency's Organization Group 
structure, and/or by narrowing down Child/Descendant Group access to GT&Cs within your agency's Organization Group 
structure. 

 

- Leaving the DII set to Yes will allow Child/Descendant Groups within your agency's Organizational Group structure to 
be able to access, view, or work on the GT&C depending on the Roles the users assigned Groups hold in their user 
account. All other Groups within your agency's Organizational Group structure that share the ALC(s) with the Group 
selected for the GT&C will appear in the Subordinate Group(s) boxes. 

 

- Selecting No on the DII will allow you to limit the number of Child/Descendant Groups within your agency's 
Organizational Group structure who are able to access and view the GT&C. However, through the Subordinate 
Group(s) section, you may grant GT&C access to users who belong to one or more of the Child/Descendant and/or 
Subordinate Groups within your agency's Organizational Group structure who may share the ALC used on the GT&C 
based on the Roles and Groups that are assigned to individual user accounts (thus allowing agencies the flexibility to 
narrow the amount of Groups and users who can access GT&Cs). A user that has access to GT&Cs through a 
Subordinate Group will only be able to create an Order off the GT&C as long as they hold the appropriate Role in their 
user account (Requesting Order Manager or Servicing Order Manager ), and depending on which trading partner (the 
Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency) was selected as the Order Originating Partner Indicator on the GT&C. 

 

In addition: 

 

- Each trading partner controls the DII value for their side of the transaction 

 

- DII is eligible for Administrative (Admin) Changes 


 

9. Once a Group is selected, a list of available Agency Location Codes (ALCs) * will display in the Available ALCs 
box , which is located in the Agency Location sub-section just below the Group Name field. (Note : You may select 
more than one ALC if your agency has access to multiple ALCs, and you as an individual user has access to more than 
one ALC through your G-Invoicing user account configuration. However, it is important to note that if an Order is 
created off of a GT&C that has multiple ALCs entered into it, only a single ALC may be used on that Order.) 

*To view a list of all ALCs currently assigned to agencies in G-Invoicing, please see here . 

 

- To Search for an ALC : You may manually scroll through the ALC list to locate the code you are looking for. Or you 
may type in the ALC number in the Search field that is located right above the Select an Agency Code (ALC) list. As 
you type, the results will be filtered down to the exact ALC after you have finished entering the complete ALC. 

 



 

- To Select an ALC : Click on an ALC from the Select an Agency Code ALC list, then click on the blue Add button to the 
right of the list. The selected ALC should then appear in the Selected Agency Codes list on the right. You may repeat 
this method if you wish to add multiple ALCs to the GT&C. 

 



 

- To Select Multiple ALCs at One Time : Press the Shift key on your keyboard, then click on each ALC you wish to add 
to the GT&C. After you have selected all of the ALCs you need, click on the blue Add button to the right of the list. The 
selected ALCs should then appear in the Selected Agency Codes list on the right. 

 

- To Remove an ALC from the GT&C : Click on an ALC from the Selected Agency Code list, then click on the blue 
Remove button. The ALC will no longer display in the selected list and will return to the Select an Agency Code 
(ALC) list on the left. You may repeat this method if you wish to remove multiple ALCs from the GT&C. 

 

- To Remove Multiple ALCs at One Time : Press the Shift key on your keyboard, then click on each ALC you wish to 
remove from the GT&C. After you have selected all of the ALCs you want to remove, click on the blue Remove button. 
The selected ALCs will appear in the Select an Agency Code (ALC) list on the left. 

 

10. The Subordinate Group(s) section will populate with a list of available Groups when the ALC(s) for the Requesting 
Agency have been selected . The following Business Rules apply for Subordinate Group selection: 

 

- The GT&C is owned and maintained by a “primary” Group 

- A Primary Group may share the agreement with Subordinate Group(s) 

- Subordinate Group(s) must reside in the same Agency Account as the Primary Group 


- A GT&C Manager requires no access to Subordinate Group(s) 

- Sharing a GT&C requires approval by both partners 

- A GT&C Manager may designate Subordinates when creating a GT&C 

- A GT&C Manager may Modify a GT&C to add Subordinate(s) 

- Subordinates may be removed through a Modification 

- Subordinate(s) must contain one or more of the GT&C’s ALCs 

- A Subordinate Group’s descendants do not have access to the GT&C through this primary/subordinate relationship 

- This field is limited to 50 Groups 

 

- The Group name is limited to 100 alphanumeric characters 

 

 

- To Search for a Subordinate Group : You may manually scroll through the Subordinate Group list to locate the 
group you are looking for. Or, you may type in the name of the Group in the Search field that is located right above the 
Select Subordinates list. As you type the results will be filtered down to the exact Subordinate Group after you have 
finished entering the complete Group name: 

 

 



 

 

- To Select a Subordinate Group : Click on a Subordinate Group from the Select Subordinates list, then click on the 
blue Add button to the right of the list. The selected Subordinate Group should then appear in the Selected 
Subordinates list on the right. You may repeat this method if you wish to add multiple Subordinate Groups to the 
GT&C. 

 



 

 

 

- To Select Multiple Subordinate Groups at One Time : Press the Shift key on your keyboard, then click on each 
Subordinate Group you wish to add to the GT&C. After you have selected all of the Subordinate Groups you need, click 


on the blue Add button to the right of the list. The selected Subordinate Groups should then appear in the Selected 
Subordinates list on the right. 

 

- To Remove a Subordinate Group from the GT&C : Click on a Subordinate Group from the Selected Subordinates 
list, then click on the blue Remove button. The Subordinate Group will no longer display in the selected list and will 
return to the Select Subordinates list on the left. You may repeat this method if you wish to remove multiple 
Subordinate Groups from the GT&C. 

 

- To Remove Multiple Subordinate Groups at One Time : Press the Shift key on your keyboard, then click on each 
Subordinate you wish to remove from the GT&C. After you have selected all of the Subordinates you want to remove, 
click on the blue Remove button. The selected Subordinate Groups will appear in the Select Subordinates list on the 
left. 

 

11. The Cost Center , Business Unit , and Department ID fields are free form, and are optional. However, anything 
entered into these fields on the GT&C will affect what Cost Center, Business Unit, and Department ID information may 
be included on an Order that is created off of it. T o add one or more of these items to a GT&C: 

- Click on either the Add Cost Center , Add Business Unit or Add Department ID buttons. The Add box will appear. 

 

- Type or paste the appropriate Business Units (20 characters maximum), Cost Centers (35 characters maximum), or 
Department IDs (20 characters maximum), one item per line, in the Add box: 

 

 



 

- Click on the blue Add Business Unit(s) , Add Cost Center(s) , or Add Department ID(s) buttons on the bottom of 
the box to add the items to the GT&C. 

 

If you would like to add additional data to any of the fields at a later time, click on the Add More button to the right of 
each Reference Data type: 

 

 



 


- The Add box will appear, and you may follow the steps noted above to add new items to the list. (Clicking on Cancel 
will return you to the previous GT&C page.) 

 

To remove any of these items from the fields, highlight the item you would like to remove from the GT&C, and click on 
the Remove button to the right of the item type: 

 

 



 

12. In the Servicing Agency sub-section, click on the drop-down menu to the right of Agency Account and select an 
agency. Instead of having to scroll through the list of Agency Names, you may start to type in the name of an agency in 
the Search bar right above the Agency Name list. As you type, the results will narrow down to the exact agency you are 
looking for as you finish typing in the Agency Name. 

- Note : Please ensure that you are searching for the correct agency account name. For example, Army is listed in GInvoicing 
as United States Army and not Department of the Army . If you type the word Army in the Search field it will 
locate United States Army, and clicking on United States Army will add it to the Agency Account field. 

 

- If you cannot locate an agency account name, please see the Trading Partner Queue and Trading Partner Directory 
topic. 

 

13. In the Servicing Agency sub-section, click on the drop-down menu arrow for the Group Name & Description . 
(The Group Name is displayed first, and the Description is followed by a dash "-".) Instead of searching through the 
entire list of Group Names & Descriptions, you may search for a Group Name or Description by entering it in the search 
bar field with the magnifying glass icon that appears right above the list of Group Names & Descriptions. If you are 
unsure of what Group to select, please contact the trading partner directly. 

- In addition, clicking on the Org button to the right of the Group Name & Description field will display a tree view of the 
agency's Organizational Group structure. 

 

14. To select an Agency Location Code (ALC) , use one of the same methods mentioned above in Step 9. (If you are 
unsure of what ALC to select, please contact the trading partner directly.) If you need to remove a selected Servicing 
Agency ALC from the GT&C, please refer to Step 9 above. 

- You may view a list of available ALCs in G-Invoicing at any time from the ALC Search function. 

 

15. Skip the Cost Center , Business Unit , and Department ID sections for the Servicing Agency. This information 
may only be filled in by the Servicing Agency/trading partner once the GT&C is Shared with them. 

 

 

How to Create the GT&C as the Requesting Agency – Part 2: 

 

1. From the column on the far left side of the page, click on Header/Detail . 

 


 

 

2. Use the information in the table below to complete this portion of the GT&C relevant to the Requesting Agency. 
Please refer to United States Department of the Treasury form 7600A for additional information on the terms used in 
the GT&C. 

Field Name 

Description 

Corresponding field 
on the IAA 7600A 
form 

Order Originating 
Partner Indicator 

This setting determines which trading 
partner will have the ability to create Orders 
off of the GT&C. 

From the drop-down menu, select either 
Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency . 

Block #3 

Requesting Agency 
Agreement Tracking 
Number 

Identifier used to track GT&Cs in the 
agency's own Enterprise Resource Planning 
(ERP) system, or any method used to 
organize GT&Cs outside of G-Invoicing that 
has unique identifiers. The agency can use 
this number to tie to the G-Invoicing unique 
GT&C number. 

Enter a number up to 30 alphanumeric 
characters. 

Note : If you happen to be creating a GT&C 
as the Servicing agency, this field will not be 
available to you, but the Servicing Agency 
Agreement Tracking Number will be. 

 

Servicing Agency 
Agreement Tracking 
Number 

This field will be unavailable to the 
Requesting Agency. 

Identifier used to track GT&Cs in the 
agency's own Enterprise Resource Planning 
(ERP) system, or any method used to 
organize GT&Cs outside of G-Invoicing that 
has unique identifiers. The agency can use 
this number to tie to the G-Invoicing unique 
GT&C number. 

 

Note : If you happen to be creating a GT&C 
as the Servicing agency, this field will be 
available to you (maximum of 30 
alphanumeric characters), but the 
Requesting Agency Agreement Tracking 
Number will not. 

 


Termination Days 

Enter the number of days during which 
either party can terminate the GT&C. If you 
do not enter anything in this field, GInvoicing 
will default this to 30 days. 

Block #5 

Agreement Type 
(Required) 

Select one of the following: 

Single Order - GT&C allows exactly one 
Order creation. 

Multiple Orders - GT&C allows one or more 
Order creations. 

Block #6 

Advance Payment 
Indicator (Required) 

Select one of the following: 

Yes – If Orders associated with this GT&C 
can include an advance payment. 

No – If Orders associated with this GT&C 
cannot include an advance payment. 

Block #7 

Assisted Acquisitions 
Indicator (Required) 

Select Yes or No from the drop-down 
menu. 

If 'Yes' is selected, then the Assisted 
Acquisitions field in the Agreement 
Information section of the GT&C is required 
to be filled out. 

Note : Once a GT&C has been moved to a 
Shared Draft status, this indicator cannot be 
edited/updated/modified in any way. 

Block #8 

Enforce Total 
Remaining Amount 
Indicator 

Identifies if G-Invoicing should enforce the 
total value of orders to remain below the 
Total Amount on the GT&C. If "Yes" is 
selected, G-Invoicing will not allow Order 
total to exceed the GT&C total. This is an 
optional field for Agreements outside of GInvoicing. 


Select Yes or No from the drop-down 
menu. 

Amount will be calculated as Total Direct 
Cost Amount plus Total Overhead Fees and 
Charges Amount. 

Block #9 

Total Direct Cost 
Amount 

Enter the total direct cost amount, in the 
format $$$$$$$.CC, up to 15 digits. The 
amount must be equal to or greater than 
$0.00. 

Block #9 

Total Overhead Fees 
and Charges Amount 

Enter the total overhead fees and charges 
amount, in the format $$$$$$$.CC, up to 
15 digits. The amount must be equal to or 
greater than $0.00 

Block #9 

Preparer Name 

Name of the user who prepared the form. 

This field is read-only, and will auto-fill with 
the Preparer’s information once the GT&C 
has been moved to a Shared Draft status. 

Block #25 

Preparer Phone 

Phone number of the user who prepared the 
form. 

This field is read-only, and will auto-fill with 
the Preparer’s information once the GT&C 
has been moved to a Shared Draft status. 

Block #25 

Preparer Email 

Email address of the user who prepared the 
form. 

This field is read-only, and will auto-fill with 
the Preparer’s information once the GT&C 
has been moved to a Shared Draft status. 

Block# 25 

 


 

 

3. From the column on the far left side of the page, click on Agreement Information , and if needed, fill out the fields 
based on information provided in the table below. 

- Note : Users should be mindful of copying and pasting heavily formatted data from external documents into these 
fields (i.e., Word documents with numbering or bullets contained in it, etc.) as the system will often generate an error 
message due to formatting issues. If you should happen to receive an error message in any of the below fields after 
pasting heavily formatted data into them, it is advised that you completely remove all info from the affected field, save 
the GT&C, then attach the related document to the GT&C. Please be aware that a GT&C draft must be saved at least 
one time before you will be able to add an attachment to it. 

- Additionally, users may expand and contract the size of an Agreement Information field by hovering on the lower right 
corner of the field until the up/down arrows appear, and then dragging the field up or down: 

 



 

 



 

 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Corresponding 
field on the 
7600A form 

Explanation 
of Overhead 
Fees and 
Charges 

This field is only accessible to the Servicing Agency. 

Block #10 

Scope 

Enter the Requesting Agency’s scope of the work 
performance for the entire IAA by the Servicing Agency (up 
to 4,000 alphanumeric characters). 

You can attach the scope/statement of work/memorandum 
of understanding, which may contain roles and 
responsibilities. 

Please see the section Work with Attachments to GT&Cs for 
instructions. 

Block #11 

Roles 

Enter the roles and responsibilities that the Requesting 
Agency must carry out to ensure the effective management 
and fulfillment of the IAA requirements (up to 4,000 
alphanumeric characters). 

Block #12 

Restrictions 

State and/or attach unique requirements and/or mission 
specific restrictions specific to this GT&C, up to 4,000 

Block #14 


alphanumeric characters. 

Please see the section Work with Attachments to GT&Cs for 
instructions. 

Assisted 
Acquisitions 
(Conditional) 

The agency’s list of organizations (Offices, Bureaus, 
Divisions, etc.) that are authorized to request or provide 
acquisition assistance for the General Terms and Conditions 
(GT&C). Up to 4,000 alphanumeric characters allowed. 

 

If 'Yes' was selected as the Assisted Acquisitions Indicator 
on the GT&C, then this field is required to be filled out. 

 

Note : Once a GT&C has been shared with a trading 
partner, this indicator cannot be edited/updated/modified 
in any way. 

Block #17 
(Requesting 
Agency) and 
#18 (Servicing 
Agency) 

Clauses 

Include any additional Requesting Agency clause(s) and 
any amendment clauses (up to 4,000 alphanumeric 
characters). 

For example, if there is a termination, dispute, or protest 
clause specifically related to this agreement, include it as 
an attachment. 

Please see the section Work with Attachments to GT&Cs in 
for instructions. 

Blocks #19 and 
#20 

Assisted 
Acquisition 
Small 
Business 
Credit 
Clause 

Standard clause: “The Servicing Agency will allocate the 
socio-economic credit to the Requesting Agency for any 
contract actions it has executed on behalf of the 
Requesting Agency.” 

 

This field is read-only, and will auto-fill with the above 
statement once the GT&C has been Saved for the first 
time. 

Block #15 

Disputes 

Standard clause: “Disputes related to this GT&C and any 
related Orders shall be resolved in accordance with 
instructions provided in the Treasury Financial Manual 
(TFM) Volume I, Part 2, Chapter 4700, Appendix 5; 
Intragovernmental Transaction (IGT) Guide, at 
http://tfm.fiscal.treasury.gov/content/tfm/v1/p2/c470.html 
”. 

This field is read-only, and will auto-fill with the above 
statement once the GT&C has been Saved for the first 
time. 

Block #16 

 

CRITICAL NOTE : If you are satisfied with the information you have entered into the GT&C, please ensure that you 
save the GT&C as a Draft at this point. If you move out of the GT&C sub-menu without saving the document as a Draft 
first, the document will not be retained, and you will need to create the GT&C over from scratch. 

 

As a reminder, a GT&C number will not generate on the document until you save a Draft for the first time. 

 

 

How to Save and/or Share a GT&C as a Requesting Agency 

After you finish entering GT&C information as a Requesting Agency, select one of the following: 

- To save a current draft of the GT&C without allowing the other trading partner agency to access or view the GT&C, 
click Save Internal Draft . (This option is available to users who possess the Requesting GT&C Creator or the 
Requesting GT&C Manager roles, and allows for future editing of the GT&C.) 

A GT&C in an Internal Draft status that has been saved may be deleted at any time by a Requesting GT&C Creator or 
Requesting GT&C Manager by clicking the Delete button. You cannot delete a GT&C that has moved to Pending 
Approval status. Instead, you may Approve or Reject the GT&C. 

After an Internal Draft is saved, users may click on the Options box near the top right corner of the GT&C page and 
select Audit History , which will display the creation, approval, and modification history for the GT&C. To return to the 
GT&C details page, click the “X” in the top right corner of the Audit History box to return to the GT&C. 

- You may update an Internal Draft by making any necessary changes, then clicking Update Internal Draft . 


- To forward the GT&C on to the other trading partner agency so that they may access and review the document, click 
Share Draft. (Note : This option is only available to users who hold the Requesting GT&C Manager role.) If your agency 
has been configured for Workflow , this button will be grayed out until the appropriate number of GT&C Reviewers has 
Accepted the document. Please see the item directly below for more information. 

- If your agency has been configured for Workflow , click on the Submit for Review button on the bottom of the page. 
A "Success: Workflow Review Open " message will display if the GT&C is affected by your agency's active Workflow 
configuration rules. (If the GT&C falls outside of your agency's active Workflow configuration rules, a "GT&C Workflow 
Review Not Required " message will display, and the Share Draft button will become available to select.) Please be 
aware that until the appropriate amount of GT&C Reviewers has accepted the GT&C, the Share Draft button on the 
GT&C will be grayed out, and the document will not be able to be Shared with the trading partner. Once a GT&C has 
been fully Reviewed and Accepted by the appropriate number of GT&C Reviewers, the Share Draft button will become 
available, and the GT&C may be Shared with the trading partner. 

 

a) A GT&C Workflow Reviewer has the ability to return a GT&C back to its creator(s) for additional work, if needed. To 
work on a GT&C that has been Returned for Review , please visit here . 

 

b) Please be aware that GT&Cs that fall under Workflow configuration rules may appear to bypass Workflow based on 
the sequence of actions. For example, if Workflow is triggered before a GT&C is complete, the rules may not apply at 
the time of triggering but may end up applying at a later date. If a GT&C is updated after Workflow is triggered, rules 
may have already been evaluated, and a decision will have been made (Review or No Review) based on data at that 
point in time. 

 

Note : Once the GT&C is shared with a trading partner, the Requesting Agency will no longer be able to edit the 
document until it is either submitted or rejected by the Servicing Agency. However, it may be deleted completely by the 
Requesting Agency by clicking the Delete button. The option to delete a shared GT&C may only be performed by users 
with the Requesting GT&C Manager role, and will remove the GT&C completely from the Servicing Agency’s view. Once 
a GT&C has been promoted to Pending Approval status, it cannot be deleted, but it can be Rejected or Returned by 
the trading partner (please see Approving or Rejecting the GT&C or Returning a GT&C in a Draft Status Back to the 
Agency that Created It for more details). 

 

After you click on the Share Draft button, one of two things will occur: 

- If the GT&C passes the data validation stage, a message stating “Success – Draft GT&C Shared With Trading 
Partner ” will display, and notifications will be sent to the appropriate Servicing Agency users if they have subscribed to 
them. 

- If the GT&C does not pass the data validation stage, a message stating “Error: Data Validation Failed. Please 
Correct Invalid Data ” will appear near the top right corner of the GT&C. If you look on the left side of the GT&C page, 
a red oval will display to the right of one or more section names. The number in the middle of the red oval will denote 
the number of errors that need to be corrected within that section before the GT&C can be submitted for approval. 

For each section that displays a red oval, click on the section name to view the specific data/fields that need to be 
addressed. The items that need to be corrected will be underlined in red, along with a brief description of the error 
provided just below the data/field itself. 

In the example below, there were six errors noted in the Header/Detail section of the GT&C. Clicking on Header/Detail 
from the menu on the left side of the page revealed that there were a number of fields that were left empty, with the 
text “Required ” displayed beneath them. 


 

Filling out blank required fields and/or correcting information in affected fields will remove the red ovals from the 
section menu on the left side of the page. You may also remove the large error message at the top of the GT&C by 
clicking on the red “X” in the far right side of the error message box. 

When all of the errors have been cleared, click on the Share Draft button to send the GT&C to the Servicing Agency. If 
the GT&C passes data validation, notifications will be sent to the appropriate Servicing Agency users via email if they 
have subscribed to them. 

 

How to Complete a GT&C Initiated by the Partner Agency – Part 3: 

 

To complete a GT&C, the trading partner agency (in this case the Servicing Agency) logs into G-Invoicing and accesses 
a GT&C in a Shared Draft status. The Servicing Agency reviews and enters any applicable information in the 
agreement fields, and then submits the GT&C to move it to the Approval stage. 

Note : An agency has the option of returning a GT&C in a Shared Draft status back to the trading partner that created it 
without having to forward the GT&C on for Approvals first. For instructions on how to return a GT&C in a Shared Draft 
status back to the agency that created it, please click here . 

CRITICAL NOTE : During this process, GT&Cs do not self-save. If you are completing a GT&C and should happen to 
move out of the GT&C sub-menu without saving the document as a Draft first, the information you have entered into 
the GT&C will not be retained, and you will need to start over. For instructions on how to save a GT&C as a Draft as a 
Partner Agency, please see here . 

 

1. From the Servicing Agency drop-down menu, click on GT&C . 

2. From the GT&C# column, click the link for a GT&C in a Shared Draft status that the Servicing Agency needs to 
complete. 

 

3. The GT&C will open, and will display the Partner Information section of the document as a default: 

 




 

4. On the Partner Information page, scroll down to the Servicing Agency section, and complete the fields described 
in the table below, if applicable. 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Corresponding 
field on the IAA 
7600A Form 

GT&C Title 
(Required) 

Enter a descriptive name for the GT&C. 

 

Block #2 

Agreement 
Start Date 
(Required) 

Enter the start date for the GT&C or click the 
calendar button to browse for the date. 

If the month and the arrows are not visible to 
you on the calendar box, please lower the zoom 
level on your internet browser and/or computer 
screen. 

Block #4 

Agreement 
End Date 
(Required) 

Enter the end date for the GT&C or click the 
calendar button to browse for the date. 

If the month and the arrows are not visible to 
you on the calendar box, please lower the zoom 
level on your internet browser and/or computer 
screen. 

Block #4 

Group Name 
& Description 
(Required) 

Select an appropriate Group Name from the 
drop-down menu. (The Group Name is displayed 
first, and the Description is followed by a dash "- 
".) Instead of searching through the entire list of 
Group Names & Descriptions, you may search for 
a Group Name or Description by entering it in the 
search bar field with the magnifying glass icon 
that appears right above the list of Group Names 
& Descriptions. 

In addition, clicking on the Org button to the 
right of the Group Name & Description field will 
display a tree view of the agency's 
Organizational Group structure. 

 

Note : If a Group does not appear for you in the 
Group Name & Description field and you believe 
it should, please contact one of your agency's 
User Administrators for assistance. 

Block #1 


Document 
Inheritance 

The Document Inheritance Indicator (DII) is 
set to Yes as a default. 

The DII setting provides flexibility in allowing 
broader access to GT&Cs through the descendant 
Groups within your agency's Organization Group 
structure, or by narrowing down descendent 
Group access to GT&Cs within your agency's 
Organization Group structure. 

- Leaving the DII set to Yes will allow 
Child/Descendant Groups within your agency's 
Organizational Group structure to be able to 
access, view, or work on the GT&C depending on 
the Roles the users assigned Groups hold in their 
user account. All other Groups within your 
agency's Organizational Group structure, that 
share the ALC(s) with the Group selected for the 
GT&C, will appear in the Subordinate Group(s) 
boxes. 

 

- Selecting No on the DII will allow you to limit 
the number of Child/Descendant Groups within 
your agency's Organizational Group structure 
who are able to access and view the GT&C. 
However, through the Subordinate Group(s) 
section, you may grant GT&C access to users 
who belong to one or more of the 
Child/Descendant and/or Subordinate Groups 
within your agency's Organizational Group 
structure who may share the ALC used on the 
GT&C based on the Roles and Groups that are 
assigned to individual user accounts (thus 
allowing agencies the flexibility to narrow the 
amount of Groups and users who can access 
GT&Cs). A user that has access to GT&Cs 
through a Subordinate Group will be able to 
create an Order off the GT&C as long as they 
hold the appropriate Role in their user account 
(Requesting Order Manager or Servicing Order 
Manager ), and depending on which trading 
partner (the Requesting Agency or Servicing 
Agency) was selected as the Order Originating 
Partner Indicator on the GT&C. 

Block #1 

Agency 
Location 
Code 
(Required) 

At least one ALC should have already been 
entered into the GT&C by the agency that 
created it. If updates to the ALC(s) are needed, 
you may refer to the instructions provided 
above . 

As of G-Invoicing R4.0, more than one ALC may 
be entered into a GT&C. To view a list of all ALCs 
currently assigned to agencies in G-Invoicing, 
please see here . 

Block #1 

Subordinate 
Groups(s) 
(Optional) 

The Subordinate Group(s) section should 
populate with a list of available Groups if the 
Document Inheritance Indicator (DII) has been 
set to No on the GTC, and after the ALC(s) for 
the Requesting Agency have been selected. 

The process for searching, selecting, adding, and 
removing Subordinate Groups from this section 
are exactly the same as the ones noted above . 

This field is limited to 50 Groups. 

The Group name is limited to 100 alphanumeric 
characters. 

Block #1 

Business Unit 
(Optional) 

Enter the appropriate Business Unit* (20 
characters maximum) 

Block #1 

Cost Center 

Enter the appropriate Cost Center* (35 

Block #1 


(Optional) 

characters maximum) 

Department 
ID (Optional) 

Enter the appropriate Department ID* (20 
characters maximum) 

Block #1 

 

*The Cost Center , Business Unit , and Department ID fields are free form, and are optional. However, anything 
entered into these fields on the GT&C will affect what Cost Center, Business Unit, or Department ID information may be 
included on an Order that is created off of it. To add one or more of these items to a GT&C: 

- Click on either the Add Business Unit , Add Cost Center , or Add Department ID buttons. The Add box will appear. 

- Type or paste the appropriate Business Unit, Cost Center, or Department IDs, one item per line, in the Add box: 

 



 

- Click on the blue Add Business Unit(s) , Add Cost Center(s) , or Add Department ID(s) buttons to add the items 
to the GT&C. 

 

If you would like to add additional data to any of these fields at a later time, click on the Add More button to the right 
of each item type: 

 

 



 

- The Add box will appear, and you may follow the steps noted above to add new items to the list. (Clicking on Cance l 
will return you to the previous GT&C page.) 

 

To remove any items from the fields, highlight the item you would like to remove from the GT&C, and click on the 
Remove button to the right of the item type: 

 

 




 

5. In the column on the left-hand side of the page, click on Header/Detail , and complete or update the available fields 
as described in the table below, if applicable. 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Corresponding 
field on the 
7600A form 

Servicing 
Agency 
Agreement 
Tracking 
Number 

Identifier used to track agreements in the 
agency's own ERP (if they use the ERP for 
agreements) or any method to organize 
agreements outside of G-Invoicing that has 
unique identifiers. The agency can use this 
number to tie to the G-Invoicing unique GT&C 
number. 

Enter a tracking number up to 30 alphanumeric 
characters. 

 

Note : If the GT&C has been created by the 
Servicing Agency, this field will not be available 
to the Requesting Agency. 

 

Requesting 
Agency 
Agreement 
Tracking 
Number 

Identifier used to track agreements in the 
agency's own ERP (if they use the ERP for 
agreements) or any method to organize 
agreements outside of G-Invoicing that has 
unique identifiers. The agency can use this 
number to tie to the G-Invoicing unique GT&C 
number. 

Enter a tracking number up to 30 alphanumeric 
characters. 

 

Note : If the GT&C has been created by the 
Servicing Agency, this field will not be available 
to them. 

 

Termination 
Days 

Enter the number of days during which either 
party can terminate the GT&C. If you do not 
enter anything in this field, G-Invoicing defaults 
to 30 days. 

Block #5 

Agreement 
Type 
(Required) 

Select one of the following: 

Single Order - GT&C allows exactly one Order 
creation. 

Multiple Orders - GT&C allows one or more 
Order creations. 

Block #6 

Advance 
Payment 
Indicator 

Select one of the following: 

Yes – If Orders associated with this GT&C can 

Block #7 


(Required) 

include an advance payment. 

No – If Orders associated with this GT&C cannot 
include an advance payment. 

Assisted 
Acquisition 
Indicator 

This indicator may only be set by the Requesting 
Agency. 

If 'Yes' has been selected, then the Assisted 
Acquisitions field in the Agreement Information 
section of the GT&C is required to be filled out. 

Note : Once a GT&C has been moved to a Shared 
Draft status, this indicator cannot be 
edited/updated/modified in any way. 

Block #8 

Enforce Total 
Remaining 
Amount 
Indicator 

Identifies if G-Invoicing should enforce the total 
value of orders to remain below the Total Amount 
on the GT&C. If "Yes" is selected, G-Invoicing will 
not allow Order total to exceed the GT&C total. 
This is an optional field for Agreements outside of 
G-Invoicing. 

Select Yes or No from the drop-down menu. 

Amount will be calculated as Total Direct Cost 
Amount plus Total Overhead Fees and Charges 
Amount. 

Block #9 

Total Direct 
Cost Amount 

Enter the total direct cost amount, in the format 
$$$$$$$.CC, up to 15 digits. 

Block #9 

Total 
Overhead 
Fees and 
Charges 
Amount 

Enter the total overhead fees and charges 
amount, in the format $$$$$$$.CC, up to 15 
digits. 

Block #9 

 

6. In the column on the left-hand side of the page, click on Agreement Information , and complete or update the 
available fields as described in the table below, if applicable. Users should be mindful of copying and pasting heavily 
formatted data from external documents into these fields (i.e., Word documents with numbering, bullets, etc.) as the 
system will often generate an error message due to formatting issues. 

- Note : Users should be mindful of copying and pasting heavily formatted data from external documents into these 
fields (i.e., Word documents with numbering or bullets contained in it, etc.) as the system will often generate an error 
message due to formatting issues. If you should happen to receive an error message in any of the below fields after 
pasting heavily formatted data into them, it is advised that you completely remove all info from the affected field, save 
the GT&C, then attach the related document to the GT&C. Please be aware that a GT&C draft must be saved at least 
one time before you will be able to add an attachment to it. 

- Additionally, users may expand and contract the size of an Agreement Information field by hovering on the lower right 
corner of the field until the up/down arrows appear, and then dragging the field up or down: 

 



 

 

 




 

Field Name 

Description 

Corresponding 
field on the IAA 
7600A Form 

Explanation of 
Overhead Fees and 
Charges 

Enter if the Requesting Agency entered 
an amount in the Overhead Fees and 
Charges field. 

 

Block #10 

Scope 

This field is only accessible to the 
Requesting Agency. 

Block #11 

Roles 

Enter the roles and responsibilities that 
the Servicing Agency must carry out to 
ensure the effective management and 
fulfillment of the IAA requirements, up 
to 4,000 alphanumeric characters. 

Block #13 

Restrictions 

State and/or attach unique 
requirements and/or mission specific 
restrictions specific to this GT&C, up to 
4,000 alphanumeric characters. 

Please see the topic Work with 
Attachments to GT&Cs for instructions. 

Block #14 

Assisted 
Acquisitions 
(Conditional) 

This is required with an Assisted 
Acquisition Agreement. 

Enter the names of organizations 
authorized to request acquisition 
assistance for the Order, up to 4,000 
alphanumeric characters. 

 

Note : Once the GT&C has moved to a 
Pending Approval status, this field 
cannot be edited/updated/modified in 
any way. 

Block #17 
(Requesting Agency) 
and Block #18 
(Servicing Agency) 

Clauses 

Enter any additional rules, conditions, 
regulations, etc., which need 
consideration or will dictate the 
behavior of any actions taken as part of 
this agreement up to 4,000 

Block #20 


alphanumeric characters. 

For Example: If there is a termination, 
dispute, or protest clause specifically 
related to this agreement, include it as 
an attachment. 

Please see the topic Work with 
Attachments to GT&Cs for instructions. 

 

CRITICAL NOTE : If you are satisfied with the information you have entered into the GT&C, please ensure that you 
save the GT&C as a Draft at this point. If you move out of the GT&C sub-menu without saving the document as a Draft 
first, information you have entered into the GT&C will not be retained, and you will need to start over from scratch. 

 

How To Save a GT&C Initiated by the Partner Agency : 

After you finish entering the Servicing Agency GT&C information, select one of the following: 

- To save a current draft of the GT&C click Save Shared Draft . (This option is available to users who possess the 
Servicing GT&C Creator or the Servicing GT&C Manager role, and allows for future editing of the GT&C by the Servicing 
Agency.) The updated Shared Draft will be visible to the Requesting Agency. 

Once a GT&C is saved, users can click on the Options box near the top right corner of the GT&C page and select Audit 
History to view the audit trail. The audit trail displays the approval and modification history for the GT&C. To return to 
the GT&C, click on the “X” in the top right corner of the Audit History box to remove it from view. 

- You may update a Shared Draft by making any necessary changes, then clicking Save Shared Draft . 

 

 

How to Submit a GT&C For Approval : 

 

If your agency has been configured for Workflow , the Submit For Approval button will be grayed out until the 
appropriate number of GT&C Reviewers has Accepted the document. Please see the item directly below for more 
information. 

- If your agency has been configured for Workflow , and the GT&C you have received as a Shared Draft falls within the 
active Workflow routing rules your agency has created, click on the Submit for Review button on the bottom of the 
page. A "Success: Workflow Review Open " message will display if the GT&C is affected by your agency's active 
Workflow configuration rules. (If the GT&C falls outside of your agency's active Workflow configuration rules, a "GT&C 
Workflow Review Not Required " message will display.) Please be aware that until the appropriate amount of GT&C 
Reviewers has accepted the GT&C, the Submit For Approval button on the GT&C will be grayed out, and the 
document will not be able to be submitted for Approval. Once a GT&C has been fully Reviewed and Accepted by the 
appropriate number of GT&C Reviewers, the Submit For Approval button will become available, and the GT&C may then 
proceed with the Approval process. 

 

a) A GT&C Workflow Reviewer has the ability to return a GT&C back to the entity who submitted it for additional work, if 
needed. To work on a GT&C that has been Returned for Review , please visit here . 

 

b) Please be aware that GT&Cs that fall under Workflow configuration rules may appear to bypass Workflow based on 
the sequence of actions. For example, if Workflow is triggered before a GT&C is complete, the rules may not apply at 
the time of triggering but may end up applying at a later date. If a GT&C is updated after Workflow is triggered, rules 
may have already been evaluated, and a decision will have been made (Review or No Review) based on data at that 
point in time. 

 

 

To Submit a GT&C For Approval: 

 

(Please note that only users who hold either the Requesting Agency GT&C Manager or Servicing Agency GT&C Manager 
roles in their G-Invoicing user accounts may submit GT&Cs for Approval.) 

 

1. A trading partner (the agency that did not create the GT&C) locates a GT&C from the GT&C Summary List that is in a 


Shared Draf t status, and clicks on the GT&C# to open the GT&C. 

2. Click on Submit For Approval button on the bottom of the page. 

3. Click on Yes to submit the GT&C for Approval. (Clicking on No returns you to the previous GT&C page.) 

4. After you click on Yes, one of two things will occur: 

- If the GT&C passes the data validation stage, a message stating "Success: GT&C Submitted for Approval" will 
display, and notifications will be sent to the appropriate users if they have subscribed to them. 

- If the GT&C does not pass the data validation stage, a message stating “Error: Data Validation Failed. Please 
Correct Invalid Data ” will appear near the top right corner of the GT&C. If you look on the left side of the GT&C page, 
a red oval will display to the right of one or more section names. The number in the middle of the red oval will denote 
the number of errors that need to be corrected within that section before the GT&C can be submitted for approval. 

For each section that displays a red oval, click on the section name to view the specific data/fields that need to be 
addressed. The items that need to be corrected will be underlined in red, along with a brief description of the error 
provided just below the data/field itself. Filling out blank required fields and/or correcting information in affected fields 
will remove the red ovals from the section menu on the left side of the page. You may also remove the large error 
message at the top of the Order by clicking on the red “X” in the far right side of the error message box. 

When all of the errors have been cleared, follow the How to Submit a GT&C For Approval steps above to send the 
GT&C to the Requesting and Servicing Agency Approvers. If the GT&C passes data validation, A "Success: GT&C 
Submitted for Approval" message will display, and the GT&C will be moved to a Pending Approval status. In 
addition, Notifications will be sent to the appropriate users via email if they have subscribed to them. 

Once a GT&C is in a Pending Approval status, the following actions may be taken on it: 

- The Requesting Agency may add their Approvals to it, or they may Reject it. 

- The Servicing Agency may add their Approvals to it, Return it, or Reject it. 


Reviewing a GT&C as Part of Workflow 

If your G-Invoicing agency account has been configured for GT&C Workflow, and has a Workflow Version in an Active 
status, GT&Cs* which meet the criteria for the routing rules established by the Workflow configuration are required to 
be Reviewed and Accepted by users within your agency who hold the GT&C Workflow Reviewer role and at least the 
Requesting Agency GT&C Viewer or Servicing Agency GT&C Viewer** roles in their G-Invoicing user accounts. Users 
who are unsure as to whether or not their agency has been configured for GT&C Workflow should contact the User 
Administrator assigned to their G-Invoicing user account for guidance. If it can be established that an agency has been 
configured for GT&C Workflow, users may contact a member from their agency who holds the GT&C Workflow 
Configuration Manager role for additional information. 

 

Depending on how your agency's active Workflow Version is configured, a certain number of Reviewers are normally 
required to Review and Accept the GT&C before it becomes available to move on in the process. In addition, each GT&C 
Reviewer must be a separate G-Invoicing user. For example, if your agency's active Workflow Version routing rules 
require that two Reviewers must review and Accept a GT&C, the same person cannot act as both Reviewers. 

 

GT&C Workflow Reviewers who wish to receive email notifications when a GT&C requires their review should contact 
their agency User Administrator and request that they be subscribed to the GT&C Workflow Item Assigned 
Notification through their G-Invoicing user account. 

 

*At this time, GT&C Workflow may only be configured for GT&Cs that are in an Internal Draft or Shared Draft status. 

 

**Users who only hold the GT&C Workflow Reviewer role in their G-Invoicing user account will not be able to access 
GT&Cs as part of Workflow Review. GT&C Workflow Reviewers must also hold at least the Requesting Agency GT&C 
Viewer or Servicing Agency GT&C Viewer roles in their user accounts to access the GT&Cs for Review; users who hold 
the GT&C Workflow Reviewer role and who also hold the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency GT&C Creator or GT&C 
Manager roles will also have access to the GT&Cs for Review. In addition, the user needs the GT&C Workflow Reviewer 
role assigned to the review Group, and they will need at least one of the GT&C-related roles assigned within the 
Organization Group hierarchy (preferably at the top of the organization) that will provide access to the GT&Cs they may 
be assigned to view. 

 

 

How To Review a GT&C as Part of Workflow : 

 

1. Log into G-Invoicing. 

 

2. On the Welcome page, any GT&C that has been Sent for Review and requires your attention will appear in the 
Work Basket box: 

 



 

3. Locate a GT&C# in the Work Basket that you would like to review, and click on its GT&C number . 

 


- Alternatively, you may click on the Go To Work Items Home Page link located in the top left corner of the Work 
Basket box to display the Work Item Dashboard: the Dashboard presents a larger version of the Work Basket, and you 
may also select a GT&C number to review from there. 

 

- Each GT&C# presented in the Work Basket will display either REQ or SRV to the right of it, which indicates which 
trading partner needs to perform the work: the Requesting Agency or the Servicing Agency. This is especially helpful to 
agencies that create documents where they are named as both the Requesting Agency and Servicing Agency on. 

 

- The gray ovals with white numbers in them that display to the right of any GT&C# in either the Work Basket or the 
Work Item Dashboard indicate the number of calendar days left until the Service Level Agreement (SLA) date for the 
item expires. Hovering over the gray ovals with your cursor will display a short message: 

 



 

- A document that appears in the Critical Work Items to Address section of the Work Basket and the Work Item 
Dashboard will reach its SLA date in four calendar days or less. 

 

4. When the GT&C you have selected displays on the screen, it presents the Partner Information section of the 
document as the default. If you would like to Review what has been entered by the GT&C creator in the Partner 
Information section, click on the View Comments button located at the bottom of the page. If you would like to 
Review any other portion of the GT&C, click on either Header/Detail , Agreement Information , or Approvals on the 
left side of the GT&C page, then click on the View Comments button. 

 

- After clicking on View Comments from any GT&C page, the Comments interface appears on the far right side of the 
page: 

 




 

- You will notice that in the Comments interface, the sections available for Comments correspond to the sections 
displayed on any given GT&C page. For example, in the screen shot directly above, the Partner Information 
Comments interface was opened for the Partner Information portion of the GT&C, which contains GT&C Header, 
Requesting Agency, and Servicing Agency information. In the Partner Information Comments interface, you are able to 
add comments in the GT&C Header, Requesting Agency, and Servicing Agency comments boxes if desired. To add 
Comments to other portions of the GT&C, click on either Header/Detail , Agreement Information , or Approvals 
from the column on the far left side of the GT&C, then click on the View Comments button. 

 

- The gray Previous Comments boxes under each section in the Comments interface will display any saved 
Comments with the name of the user who entered them and the date and time (EST) the comments were entered. 
New Comments may be added in the white boxes located directly beneath the Previous Comments boxes. 

 

- From the scroll bar located on the right side of the Comments interface, you may scroll up and down to see any 
additional comments boxes that are available for that portion of the GT&C. In addition, a scroll bar is available on the 
far right side of each Previous Comments box in the event multiple and/or lengthy Comments are saved into those 
boxes. 

 

- To remove the Partner Information Comments interface from view, click on the Hide Comments button on the 
bottom of the GT&C page. (Note : Hiding the comments does not remove any information entered into the comments 
interface, even if you have not saved the comments. It merely scrolls the interface out of view. 

 

- To cancel out of the Partner Information Comments interface, click on the Cancel button at the bottom of the 
interface. (Note : This will not retain any unsaved comments you may have entered into the interface.) 

 

Please be aware of the following: 

 

- The View Comments button will not appear for inactive Workflows. 

- The View Comments button will not appear on GT&Cs that are not affected by active Workflow. 

 

5. Enter Comments into any white box in the Comments interface. (Note : Comments are not required. If you do not 
wish to enter any Comments into the GT&C, you may skip down to Steps "b" or "c" below. However, if you plan on 
sending the GT&C back to its creator(s) for additional work, Comments should be entered into the document.) 

 




 

- After entering Comments for any section of the GT&C, you have three options available to you: 

 

a) You may save your comments by clicking the Save Comments button at the bottom of the Comments interface. 
Once Comments are saved, they will appear in the gray Previous Comments box for that particular section of the 
GT&C. Your name and the date and time (EST) the Comments were entered will appear at the beginning of the 
Comment: 

 



 

- Please note that you if you are adding Comments to a GT&C, you must save the Comments before the Accept button 
becomes available to you. 

 

b) If you are finished adding and saving all of your Comments to the GT&C, you may click on the Accept button at the 
bottom of the Comments interface, and a "Success: GT&C Workflow Accepted " message will display. Please be 
advised that if there are additional Reviewers required on any given GT&C after you Accept it, the GT&C will still display 
in the Work Basket on your G-Invoicing Welcome page as Work in Progress . After all of the required Reviews are 
completed, the GT&C will appear in the Completed Work Items section of your Work Basket. 

 

c) If you would like to return the GT&C back to its creator for additional work, click on the Return for Review button at 
the bottom of the Comments interface. A "Success: GT&C Workflow Review Returned For Rework " message will 


display. Once returned, a user tasked with updating the GT&C itself will be able to click on the View Comments button 
and review any comments/instructions left by the Reviewer, and take action on them if needed. (Note : If a user 
updates anything on a GT&C that has been Returned For Review, they do not need to resubmit the GT&C for Review.) 

 

- CRITICAL NOTE : Reviewers may Return a GT&C for Review even if they have previously Accepted the GT&C. 
However, if all of the required Reviewers on a GT&C have Accepted the document, a GT&C may not be Returned for 
Review. 

 

- If the Submit for Review button is clicked on a GT&C that is not affected by active Workflow routing rules, a 
message stating "GT&C Workflow Review Not Required " will display. 

 

6. Once all of the required Reviewers have accepted the GT&C, the Share Draft or Submit For Approval buttons at 
the bottom of the page become available, and the document may either be Shared with the trading partner or 
Submitted For Approval by the trading partner. 

 

- Any Comments entered into the GT&C during the Review process will be available to be viewed by any user who has 
access to the GT&C. 


Working on a GT&C That Has Been Returned for Review Through 
Workflow 

If your agency has been configured for GT&C Workflow , a GT&C Workflow Reviewer has the ability to Return a GT&C to 
users for additional work. 

 

 

How to Work on a GT&C That Has Been Returned for Review Through Workflow : 

 

1. Log in to G-Invoicing. 

 

2. Click on either the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus and select GT&C . The GT&C 
Summary List page will appear. 

 

3. Locate a GT&C in an Internal Draft or Shared Draft status that needs to have additional work performed on it, and 
click on its GT&C number in the GT&C# column. 

 

4. The GT&C will appear, and as a default, the Partner Information portion of the GT&C will display. Click on the 
View Comments button on the bottom of the page. The Comments interface will display on the far right side of the 
page: 

 



 

- You will notice that in the Comments interface, the sections available to view comments correspond to the sections 
displayed on any given GT&C page. For example, in the screen shot directly above, the Partner Information 
Comments interface was opened for the Partner Information portion of the GT&C, which contains GT&C Header, 
Requesting Agency, and Servicing Agency information. In the Partner Information Comments interface, you are able to 
view comments in the GT&C Header, Requesting Agency, and Servicing Agency comments boxes. To view Comments on 
other portions of the GT&C, click on either Header/Detail , Agreement Information , or Approvals from the column 
on the far left side of the GT&C, then click on the View Comments button. 

 

- To remove the Comments interface from view, click on the Cancel button at the bottom of the Comments interface, 
or click on the Hide Comments button located at the bottom of the GT&C. 

 

5. Make any desired changes to the GT&C, then click on the Save Internal Draft or Save Shared Draft buttons. Once 
Saved, the drafts will either be Accepted by one or more GT&C Workflow Reviewers, or will be Returned for Review if 
additional changes are needed on the GT&C. 

 

6. After the number of appropriate Reviewers have Accepted the GT&C, the Shared Draft or Submit For Approval 
buttons become available, and the document may either be Shared with the trading partner or Submitted For Approval 
by the trading partner. 

 

- For any questions dealing with the number of Workflow Reviewers required on any given GT&C, please contact one of 


your agency's GT&C Workflow Configuration Managers . 


Returning a GT&C in a Shared Draft Status Back to the Agency 
That Created It 

Returning a GT&C in a Shared Draft status back to the agency that created it is helpful if the agency that it has been 
shared with does not want to progress a GT&C all the way to the Approval stage just so they can Reject it. 

 

How to Return a GT&C in a Shared Draft Status Back to the Agency That Created It: 

Note : A GT&C that is in a Shared Draft status may only be returned to the agency that created it by trading partner 
users who hold either the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency GT&C Manager roles. For example, if the Requesting 
Agency created the GT&C and shared it with the Servicing Agency, only the Servicing Agency would be able to send the 
document back. 

1. From the GT&C Summary List , locate a GT&C in a Shared Draft status that you would like to return to the trading 
partner that created it. 

2. Click on the GT&C#. 

3. At the bottom of the page, click on the Return Draft button. (Note : If the Return Draft button does not appear for 
you, please contact your agency User Administrator to verify that you have the necessary user access to perform the 
action.) 

4. The Return Draft box will appear. In the Return Draft Reason field , enter the reason for the draft being returned. 

5. Click the Return Draft button. (Clicking on Cancel returns you to the GT&C.) 

6. Click Yes . (Clicking No returns you to the Return Draft Reason box.) 

7. A Success: GT&C returned to Internal Draft message will display. On the GT&C itself, the reason for the GT&C 
being returned will display underneath the GT&C status near the top of the page. 

Once a GT&C has been returned to an Internal Draft status, it will no longer appear in the GT&C Summary List for the 
agency it was originally shared with. It will only appear in the GT&C Summary List for the agency that created it. 

 

 

 


Working with Attachments to GT&Cs 

Only Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency users with the Manager, Approver, or Creator roles assigned to them are 
able to add attachments to a GT&C. Please be aware of the following when working with attachments: 

- File name must be no more than 132 characters, including the file extension (.pdf, .docx, etc.) 

- The only allowable characters in attachment file names are: lower case letters (a-z), upper case letters (A-Z), 
numbers 0 through 9, dashes, and underscores (i.e., a file named GT&C2019_mipr$ is not acceptable, but a file named 
GTC2019_mipr is) 

- The maximum number of attachments allowed per GT&C is 25 

- The upload file size limit for all allowable file types is 10MB per file 

- Maximum size of all attachments combined per document is 250MB 

- Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency Managers, Approvers, and Creators can add attachments to a GT&C in any of 
the following states: Internal Draft, Shared Draft, Pending Approval, or Open For Orders 

- File types of .zip, .rar, .cmd, .exe, .bat, and .scr are not allowed as attachments at this time 

- Requesting Agencies can view Servicing Agency attachments, but they cannot delete them. 

- Servicing Agencies can view Requesting Agency attachments, but they cannot delete them. 

- A GT&C draft must be saved at least one time before an attachment can be added to it. 

 

 

The following file types are accepted by G-Invoicing: 

 

.doc 

word 

.docx 

word 

.xls 

excel 

.xlsx 

excel 

.xlsb 

excel 

.ppt 

powerpoint 

.pptx 

powerpoint 

.ppsx 

powerpoint 

.pps 

powerpoint 

.txt 

text 

.csv 

text 

.msg 

email 

.eml 

email 

.jpg 

image 

.gif 

image 

.png 

image 

.bmp 

image 


.pdf 

image 

.accdb 

ms database 

.mdb 

ms database 

 

 

 

How to Add Attachments to GT&Cs: 

 

1. From either the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menu, click on GT&C. 

2. Click on a GT&C# . 

3. Click on the Options box on the right side of GT&C page. 

4. Click Attachments to open the Attachments box. The Attachments box will appear: 



 

 

5. Click on the Add Attachment button. The Upload Attachment box will appear: 



 

6. Click on the Browse button. 

7. Select a file from your machine or local network, then click on the Open button. Your file and its size will appear 
directly above the Nickname field: 

 




8. In the Nickname field, you may type in a name for the document (optional). 

9. Click on the Upload button. (Clicking on the Cancel button will remove the file you selected and returns you to the 
Browse function of the Upload Attachment box. Alternatively, you may also click on the small “X” to the right of the file 
name to cancel the upload and/or remove the file.) 

10. A Success: Attachment Added message will appear. To close the Attachments box, click on the “X” in the top 
right corner of the box. 

 

 

How to View Attachments to GT&Cs: 

 

1. From either the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, select a GT&C from the GT&C 
Summary Page that you would like to view, and open it by clicking on the GT&C#. 

2. Locate a GT&C from the GT&C Summary List and click on the GT&C# to open it. 

3. From any GT&C section, click on the Options box near the top right corner of the page. 

4. Click on Attachments . The Attachments box will appear. 

5. Locate the file you wish to view, and click on its File Name . 

6. Click on Open to view the file, Save to store the file on your machine or network , or Cancel to return to the list of 
Attachments. (Note : This may differ slightly depending on the internet browser being used.) 

 

 

 

How to Delete Attachments from GT&Cs: 

 

1. From either the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, select a GT&C from the GT&C 
Summary Page that you would like to delete an attachment from, and open it by clicking on the GT&C#. 

2. Locate a GT&C from the GT&C Summary List and click on the GTC# to open it. 

3. From any GT&C section, click on the Options box near the top right corner of the page. 

4. Click on Attachments . 

 

5. Locate the file you wish to delete, and click on the garbage can icon for it in the Delete column. 

6. Click on Yes to delete the attachment. (Clicking on No returns you to the list of Attachments.) 

7. A Success: Attachment Deleted message will appear. 


Approving a GT&C 

The final step (Part 4) of creating a GT&C is the Approval process. Once the Requesting and Servicing Agencies have 
completed their respective portions, the GT&C is sent on for Approval, and the Requesting and Servicing Agencies must 
both electronically approve the GT&C. To Initially or Finally Approve a GT&C, a user must have the Requesting Agency 
and/or Servicing Agency Initial or Final Approver roles assigned to their G-Invoicing user account. 

If subscribed to the Intragov GT&C Created or Changed Notification , G-Invoicing notifies a Requesting Agency or 
Servicing Agency user when a GT&C is created or modified. To approve a GT&C, a Requesting or Servicing Agency 
Approver accesses the GT&C Summary List and selects a GT&C in a Pending Approval status. 

When a GT&C is in a Pending Approval status, the Requesting Agency and the Servicing Agency can Approve or Reject 
the GT&C. (Note : A GT&C in a Pending Approval status cannot be updated. If an update to a GT&C in a Pending 
Approval status is needed, a Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency Approver would need to Return or Reject the 
GT&C. Once Returned or Rejected, the GT&C can then be updated, and then resubmitted for Approval.) 

 

Note : A GT&C must be Initially Approved before it can be Finally Approved . 

 

 

 

How to Approve a GT&C – Part 4: 

 

1. A user with either the Requesting or Servicing Initial Approver role may log in to G-Invoicing and click on either the 
Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menu. 

2. Click on GT&C . The GT&C Summary List will appear. 

3. From the GT&C# column, click on a GT&C with a status of Pending Approval . G-Invoicing will then open the 
GT&C, and will display the Partner Information section as a default. 

4. From the column on the left side of the page, click on Approvals . The Approvals section of the GT&C will then 
display (please note that the Approve button on the bottom of the page will be grayed out): 

 



 

 

5. Under the Initial Approval section, click on the notepad icon to the right of either Requesting Agency or 
Servicing Agency . 


6. When the notepad icon is selected, G-Invoicing populates the date, signer’s name, email address, and phone number 
fields with information from the user’s profile. Users will not be able to edit these fields. In addition, the Approve 
button turns from gray to blue. 

7. Enter your occupational title in the Title field (optional). 

8. Enter your fax number (optional). 

9. Click the Approve button at the bottom of the page . 

10. In the confirmation box, click Yes to Approve the GT&C. (Clicking on No returns you to the previous page.) 

11. A Success: Draft GT&C Submitted for Approval message will display. Please be aware of the following: 

 

· Once a user with the Requesting GT&C Initial Approver role has approved the GT&C, it will then be available for a 
user with the Requesting GT&C Final Approver role to approve the GT&C. A Final Approver will not be able to Approve 
a GT&C until it has been Initially Approved. 

· Once a user with the Servicing GT&C Initial Approver role has approved the GT&C, it will then be available for a 
user with the Servicing GT&C Final Approver role to approve the GT&C. A Final Approver will not be able to Approve a 
GT&C until it has been Initially Approved. 

 

 12. If you happen to possess the Requesting or Servicing GT&C Final Approver role, the GT&C will remain open for you, 
and you can proceed to Step 22. Otherwise, you will be returned to the GT&C Summary List. 

 13. A user with either the Requesting or Servicing Final Approver role may log in to G-Invoicing and click on either the 
Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menu. 

 14. Click on GT&C . The GT&C Summary List will appear. 

 15. From the GT&C# column, click on a GT&C with a status of Pending Approval . G-Invoicing will then open the 
GT&C, and will display the Partner Information section as a default. 

 16. From the column on the left side of the page, click on Approvals . The Approvals section of the GT&C will then 
display. 

17. Under the Final Approval section, click on the notepad icon to the right of either Requesting Agency or 
Servicing Agency . 

18. When the notepad icon is selected, G-Invoicing populates the date, signer’s name, email address, and phone 
number fields with information from the user’s profile. Users will not be able to edit these fields. 

19. Enter your occupational title in the Title field (optional). 

20. Enter your fax number (optional). 

21. Click the Approve button at the bottom of the page . 

22. In the confirmation box, click Yes to Approve the GT&C. (Clicking on No returns you to the previous GT&C page.) 

23. A Success: Draft GT&C Submitted for Approval message will display. 

 

After both agencies have fully granted their approvals, G-Invoicing will display the GT&C in both the Requesting Agency 
and Servicing Agency GT&C Summary Lists in an Open for Orders status. The system will also generate and send the 
Intragov GT&C Created or Changed Notification email to subscribed Requesting Agency and Servicing Agency users. 

Note : Once a GT&C is approved by either the Initial GT&C Approver or the Final GT&C Approver , that same Approver 
may no longer Reject a GT&C. 


Rejecting a GT&C 

Please note that once a GT&C is Approved by either the Initial GT&C Approver or the Final GT&C Approver , that same 
Approver may no longer Reject a GT&C. 

 

Once a GT&C is Rejected by either trading partner, both the Requesting Agency and Servicing Agency will be able to 
edit the document. 

 

 

How to Reject a GT&C: 

 

1. From the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency tab, click on the GT&C sub-tab. The GT&C Summary List will 
appear. 

2. From the GT&C Summary List, locate a GT&C in a Pending Approval status that you would like to Reject, and click on 
its GT&C#. 

3. Click on the Reject button at the bottom of the screen. The Reject GT&C box will display: 

 

 

 

4. In the Reject GT&C Reason field, enter the reason for rejecting the GT&C (maximum of 1000 characters). 

5. Click Yes to Reject the GT&C. (Clicking Cancel will return you to the GT&C itself). 

6. The Confirmation box will appear. Click Yes to Reject the GT&C. (Clicking on No will return you to the previous 
box.) 

7. A Success: GT&C Rejected message will appear, and the GT&C will move to a Rejected status. 

 

 

 

 

 


Resubmitting a Rejected GT&C for Approval 

A GT&C in a Rejected status may be updated, and then resubmitted for Approval. 

 

 

How to Resubmit a Rejected GT&C for Approval: 

 

1. From the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, click on GT&C . The GT&C Summary List will 
appear. 

2. From the GT&C Summary List , locate a GT&C in a Rejected status that you would like to update and resubmit for 
Approval, and click on its GT&C# . 

3. Make any necessary changes to the GT&C in any of the sections, then click on the Update For Approval button. 

4. In the Update For Approval box, click Yes . (Clicking on No returns you to the GT&C itself.) 

5. A Success: Draft GT&C Submitted for Approval message will appear, and the GT&C will move to a Pending 
Approval status. 

 


Viewing the GT&C Audit History 

The GT&C Audit History displays all of the actions performed on a GT&C: modifications, updates, status changes, the 
date the changes occurred, and the User ID of the person who performed the action on the GT&C. The same information 
appears on the Audit History for both the Requesting Agency and the Servicing Agency. 

Note: Before G-Invoicing Release 3.0 , the GT&C Audit History record for an attachment was not captured if the GT&C 
had not been previously saved before an attachment was added to the document. If this occurred on a GT&C, the 
attachment is recorded in the Attachment box with its created time. However, the time stamp on that record will 
be earlier than the time stamp on the document create record in the GT&C Audit History. 

 

How to Access the GT&C Audit History: 

 

1. From the Requesting Agency tab or Servicing Agency tab, click the GT&C sub-tab. 

 

2. From the GT&C Summary Page, click the link in the GT&C# column to open a GT&C. 

 

3. From any GT&C page, click on the Options button. 

 

4. Click on Audit History . The Audit History box will then appear: 

 



 

- The GT&C Audit History displays the following information: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Date 

Date of the action 

Action 

Type of action taken (i.e., GT&C Submitted or GT&C Shared) 

User 

The User ID of the user who performed the associated action 

Comment 

A brief explanation of the action taken on the GT&C 

 

5. To return to the GT&C, click on the “X” in the top right corner of the Audit History box. 

 


Modifying a GT&C 

GT&Cs with a status of Open For Orders may be modified by either agency at any time. In addition, GT&Cs displaying 
a status of Closed for Orders , but with dollar amounts available in the Total Remaining Amount to Obligate on the 
GT&C, can still be modified by either agency. GT&C modifications are required to be Approved by both agencies . After 
both agencies approve the changes to a closed GT&C, its status will change from a Closed for Orders status to an Open 
for Orders status. 

Note : If a GT&C has one or more Orders created off of it, please be aware of the following: 

- Editable fields are determined dynamically depending upon if Orders have been created against the GT&C 

- The Agreement Start Date on the GT&C cannot be modified if Orders have been created off of the GT&C 

- The Agreement End Date on the GT&C can be extended to a later date through a modification. However, if you wish to 
change an Agreement End Date to one that is earlier than the original Agreement End Date on the GT&C, you may be 
limited on a past date range. For example, if a GT&C has an Order created off of it with an end date of 12/30/2021 and 
the GT&C itself has an end date of 12/31/2021, you will only be able to modify the end date on the GT&C to 
12/30/2021. 

- If Orders have been created against it, the GT&C Agreement Type will not be modifiable 

- When the Enforce Total Remaining Amount Indicator is set to ‘Yes’ on the GT&C and Orders off of it exist, the system 
will not allow changes to amounts that do not equal or exceed the combined amount of the Orders. For example, if you 
change the Total Direct Cost Amount (which is a required field if the Enforce Total Remaining Amount Indicator is set to 
‘Yes’), G-Invoicing updates the Total Estimated Agreement Amount: if it is now less than the Total Remaining Amount to 
Obligate, G-Invoicing shows the Total Remaining Amount to obligate as a negative figure. G-Invoicing will then display 
an error message when you submit your changes, and will not save your modifications. 

- Advanced Payment Indicator on the GT&C may not be modified from ‘Yes’ to ‘No’ when Orders exist 

- The ALCs on the GT&C may not be modified when Orders exist 

- Additions to Reference Data on the GT&C are allowed. However, Reference Data removals are allowed only when the 
affected Reference Data is not listed on an existing Order 

 

How to Modify a GT&C: 

 

1. Click the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, then click on GT&C . The GT&C Summary 
Page will appear. 

2. In the GT&C# column, locate a GT&C in an Open for Orders status that you would like to modify, and click on the 
GT&C# to open the GT&C. 

3. From any GT&C page, click on the Modify button at the bottom of the screen. 

4. The following fields may be edited depending on whether you are the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency (unless 
noted in the list of rules provided above): 

 

Requesting Agency 

Servicing Agency 

Requesting Business Units 

Servicing Business Units 

Requesting Cost Centers 

Servicing Cost Centers 

Requesting Department IDs 

Servicing Department IDs 

GT&C Title 

GT&C Title 


Agreement Start Date 

Agreement Start Date 

Agreement End Date 

Agreement End Date 

Termination Days 

Termination Days 

Agreement Type 

Agreement Type 

Enforce Total Remaining Amount Indicator 

Enforce Total Remaining Amount Indicator 

Total Direct Cost Amount 

Total Direct Cost Amount 

Total Overhead Fees and Charges Amount 

Total Overhead Fees and Charges Amount 

Advance Payment Indicator 

Advance Payment Indicator 

Scope 

Explanation of Overhead Fees and Charges 

Requesting Roles 

Servicing Roles 

Restrictions 

Restrictions 

Requesting Assisted Acquisitions 

Servicing Assisted Acquisitions 

Requesting Clauses 

Servicing Clauses 

 

5. Click on the Update For Approval button at the bottom of the page. 

6. In the Update For Approval box, click on Yes . (Clicking on No returns you to the GT&C itself.) 

7. A Success: GT&C Submitted for Approval message will appear. 

 

The status of the GT&C will change to Pending Approval . For each modification made to a GT&C, an increasing 
number will be added after the decimal point in a GT&C number (i.e., GT&C# A1410-001-002-000234 .2 has been 
modified twice). After each modification is made to a GT&C, G-Invoicing will then send the GT&C Created or Changed 
Notification to subscribed users. 

 

After a GT&C is modified, both the Requesting and Servicing Agencies will be required to complete their Approvals. 

 


Approving a GT&C Modification 

G-Invoicing notifies subscribed Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency users if a GT&C is in a Pending Approval 
status by sending the Intragov GT&C Created or Changed Notification via email. The applicable agency then opens 
the GT&C and Approves or Rejects the modification. 

 

 

How to Approve a GT&C Modification: 

 

1. From the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, click on GT&C . The GT&C Summary List 
appears. 

2. From the GT&C# column, click on a modified GT&C with a status of Pending Approval . G-Invoicing will then open 
the GT&C, and will display the Partner Information section as a default. 

3. Click on the Approvals from the menu on the left side of the page. 

4. Under the Initial Approval section, click on the notepad icon to the right of either Requesting Agency or 
Servicing Agency . 

5. When selected, G-Invoicing populates the date, signer’s name, email address, and phone number fields with 
information from the user’s profile. Users will not be able to edit these fields. 

6. Enter your occupational title in the Title field (optional). 

7. Enter your fax number (optional). 

8. Click the Approve button at the bottom of the page . 

9. In the confirmation box, click Yes to Approve the GT&C. (Clicking on No returns you to the previous page.) 

10. A Success: GT&C Submitted for Approval message will display. 

 

- Once a user with the Requesting GT&C Initial Approver role has approved the GT&C, it will then be available for a 
user with the Requesting GT&C Final Approver role to approve the GT&C. A Final Approver will not be able to Approve 
a GT&C until it has been Initially Approved. 

- Once a user with the Servicing GT&C Initial Approver role has approved the GT&C, it will then be available for a user 
with the Servicing GT&C Final Approver role to approve the GT&C. A Final Approver will not be able to Approve a GT&C 
until it has been Initially Approved. 

 

11. If you happen to possess the Requesting or Servicing GT&C Final Approver role, the GT&C will remain open for you, 
and you may skip to Step 16. Otherwise, you will be returned to the GT&C Summary Page. 

12. A user with either the Requesting or Servicing Final Approver role may log in to G-Invoicing and click on either the 
Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency tabs. 

13. Click on the GT&C sub-tab. The GT&C Summary List will appear. 

14. From the GT&C# column, click on a GT&C with a status of Pending Approval . G-Invoicing will then open the 
GT&C, and will display the Partner Information section as a default. 

15. From the column on the left side of the page, click on Approvals . The Approvals section of the GT&C will then 
display. 

16. Under the Final Approval section, click on the notepad icon to the right of either Requesting Agency or 
Servicing Agency . 

17. When selected, G-Invoicing populates the date, signer’s name, email address, and phone number fields with 
information from the user’s profile. Users will not be able to edit these fields. 

18. Enter your occupational title in the Title field (optional). 

19. Enter your fax number (optional). 

20. Click the Approve button at the bottom of the page . 

21. In the confirmation box, click Yes to Approve the GT&C. (Clicking on No returns you to the previous page.) 

22. A Success: GT&C Submitted for Approval message will display. 

 

G-Invoicing will display the GT&C in both the Requesting Agency and Servicing Agency GT&C Summary Lists in an Open 


for Orders status after both agencies have fully granted their approvals. The system will also generate and send the 
Intragov GT&C Created or Changed Notification email to subscribed Requesting Agency and Servicing Agency users. 

 

Note : Once a GT&C is approved by either the Initial GT&C Approver or the Final GT&C Approver , that same Approver 
may no longer Reject a GT&C. 


Exporting a Modified GT&C History 

Users who hold the permission(s) related to viewing GT&Cs may export a history for individual GT&Cs that have been 
Modified. 

 

How to Export a History for a Modified GT&C: 

 

1. Click on the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, click on GT&C, and locate any GT&C that 
has been modified. 

2. Click on the GT&C# . 

3. From the modified GT&C, click on the Export History button at the bottom of any page: 

 



 

4. Click on Open to display the .csv file immediately, or click Save to send the .csv file to a location on your machine or 
network. 

5. When you open the Modification History file, the original GT&C details will appear on the last line of the spread 
sheet. Each subsequent modification made to the GT&C will appear in the lines directly above it, starting with the 
number “1” noted in the GT&C Mod # column: 





Making Admin Changes to a GT&C 

Limited Administrative (Admin) Changes may be made to a GT&C in an Open for Orders status by users. Admin 
Changes to a GT&C do not require the GT&C to be re-approved, and do not have any effect on a GT&C’s status. 

Please note that only users who hold the Requesting Agency GT&C Manager and Servicing Agency GT&C Manager Roles 
assigned to their user accounts may perform Admin Changes on GT&Cs. 

 

At this time, Admin Changes may only be made to the following GT&C fields: 

 

- Requesting Agency Agreement Tracking Number (may only be updated by the Requesting Agency) 

 

- Servicing Agency Agreement Tracking Number (may only be updated by the Servicing Agency) 

 

- Document Inheritance Indicator (DII) 

 

- Subordinate Groups 

 

 

How to Make an Admin Change to a GT&C: 

 

1. From the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, click on GT&C, and locate any GT&C that is in 
an Open For Orders status. 

2. Click on the GT&C# . 

3. Click on the Admin button located at the bottom of any GT&C page. 

4. Update the one or more of the fields noted above. 

5. Once the Admin Change has been made, click on the Save Admin Changes button on the bottom of any GT&C 
page. (Note: If you would like to cancel your changes, click on the Cancel button at the bottom of the page. When the 
Cancel Admin Changes box appears, click on Yes to cancel the changes, or click on No to return to the GT&C itself.) 

6. Click on Yes if you would like to proceed with the change. (Clicking on No will return you to the previous GT&C 
page.) 

7. After clicking on Yes, a Success: Updated message should display. 


Deleting a GT&C 

Only GT&Cs that are in an Internal Draft or Shared Draft status may be Deleted. There are two items of note: 

- A GT&C that has been saved as an Internal Draft may be Deleted at any time by users from the agency that created 
the document who hold either the Requesting or Servicing GT&C Creator or Requesting or Servicing GT&C Manager 
roles. 

- A GT&C draft that has been shared with a trading partner and is in a Shared Draft status may only be deleted by 
users from the agency that created the document who hold either the Requesting or Servicing GT&C Creator or 
Requesting or Servicing GT&C Manager roles. If a GT&C has moved beyond a Shared Draft status at any time in its 
lifecycle (i.e., progressed to a Pending Approval status), the GT&C cannot be deleted. If this should occur, the agency 
that created the GT&C has two options: Reject the GT&C once it has reached a Pending Approval Status, or Close the 
GT&C once it has been fully approved by both the creating agency and the trading partner. 

 

How to Delete a GT&C: 

 

1. A user from the agency that created the document should log in to G-Invoicing. 

2. Depending on which portion of G-Invoicing the GT&C was created out of, the user will click on either the Requesting 
Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, and will then click on GT&C . A list of existing GT&C agreements will 
appear. 

3. Click on any GT&C number that is in an Internal Draft or Shared Draft status. 

4. Click on the Delete button at the bottom of the page. The Delete box will appear. 

5. Click Yes to delete the GT&C. (Clicking on No will return you to the GT&C itself.) 

5. A Success: GT&C Deleted message will display. 

 

You will be returned to the GT&C itself. Please notice that the status of the GT&C will have updated to Deleted . You 
may click on any tab or sub-tab within G-Invoicing to move out of the deleted GT&C. 

The GT&C that was just deleted will no longer appear on the GT&C Summary Page for either the Requesting or Servicing 
Agencies. 


Closing a GT&C 

GT&Cs may only be closed by Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency users who hold either the Initial GT&C Approver 
or Final GT&C Approver roles in their G-Invoicing user accounts. 

 

How to Close a GT&C : 

1. From the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menu, click on GT&C . The GT&C Summary Page 
will appear. 

2. Locate the GT&C you would like to close, and click on the GT&C# . 

3. From any GT&C page, click on the Close button at the bottom of the screen. The Close GT&C box will appear: 

 

 

4. Enter comments into the Close GT&C Reason field, which is required. (Maximum: 500 characters.) 

5. Click on the Close GT&C button to close the GT&C. (Clicking on Cancel will return you to the GT&C itself.) 

6. Click on Yes in the Confirmation box to close the GT&C. (Clicking on No will return you to the Close GT&C box.) 

7. A Success: GT&C Closed message will display, and the status of the GT&C will update to a Closed status. 

8. Click on any drop-down menu or link within G-Invoicing to move out of the closed GT&C. 

 

Once a GT&C is Closed, it can only be reopened through a Modification . 

 

 

 


Copying a GT&C 

A copy of an existing GT&C may be created by Requesting Agencies and Servicing Agencies . When copying GT&Cs, 
users should be aware of the following: 

- Copies will open in an Internal Draft status, and a new GT&C number will be created for them once they are saved as 
an Internal Draft for the first time 

- Copying an existing GT&C will remove both the Requesting Agency and Service Agency Approvals if the original GT&C 
has passed the Approval stage 

- Any Group and ALC information on the original GT&C will not be copied over to the new GT&C 

- Any attachments included on the original GT&C will not be copied over to the new GT&C 

Once a copy is created, it may be edited as needed 

 

How to Copy a GT&C: 

 

1. From the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, click on GT&C . The GT&C Summary Page 
will appear. 

2. Locate the GT&C you would like to copy, and click on the GT&C# . 

3. From any GT&C page, click on the Copy button at the bottom of the screen. 

4. A copy of the GT&C, minus any Approvals that may have been recorded on the original GT&C, will appear in an 
Internal Draft status. Please note that a GT&C number for the copy will not be generated until it is saved as an Initial 
Draft. 

5. Make any updates or changes to the copied GT&C, if needed. When you are ready to save the copy, click on the Save 
Internal Draft button at the bottom of the page. 

6. In the Save Internal Draft box, click Yes . (Clicking on No returns you to the copied GT&C itself.) 

7. A Success: Internal Draft GT&C Saved message will appear, and a GT&C number will be generated for the copied 
GT&C. 

 


Printing a GT&C 

You may print a hard copy of any given GT&C that is in any status except for Delete . Please be advised that a GT&C 
may only be printed after it has been saved at least one time. 

How to Print a GT&C: 

 

1. From the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, click on GT&C . The GT&C Summary Page 
will appear. 

2. Locate the GT&C you would like to print, and click on its GT&C # to open it. 

3. Click on the Options button near the top right side of the page, and then click on Print in the drop-down menu. 

4. The name of the .pdf file should appear in the lower left corner or the lower center of the page. Click on the .pdf file 
name to open it or click on Open ; the file will open in a new tab, and the GT&C will display as a United States 
Department of the Treasury 7600A form. 

- To print the GT&C on paper, click on the Print icon in the top right corner of the .pdf. When the .pdf Print box 
appears, select the printer of your choice, then click on Print . (Clicking on Cancel returns you to the .pdf itself.) Please 
note that printing a .pdf may be slightly different depending on the internet browser you may be using. 

- To save the GT&C as a .pdf file, click on the Download icon near the top right corner of the .pdf . Then choose a file 
name, select a location to save your file, and click Save . (Clicking on Cancel returns you to the .pdf itself.) 

5. Clicking on the “X” on the file tab at the top of the page will close the .pdf, and will return you to the GT&C itself. 

 

 


Exporting GT&C Summaries or Details to a .CSV File 

Users who hold the permission(s) related to viewing GT&Cs may export lists of their agency’s GT&C Summaries and 
GT&C Details to .csv files. The two different types of GT&C exports available will provide the following data: 

Export Summary – Will export basic GT&C information as it appears on the GT&C Summary Page. 

Export Details – Will export all of the information contained in a GT&C. 

Please be aware that the GT&C exports function will only return results based on any/all filters you may have selected 
on the GT&C Summary Page . For example, as a Requesting Agency, if you have selected only to display the GT&C 
Summary for GT&C number A1907-020-020-000242.0, and you click on the Export Summary button, the .csv file will 
only contain a list of that one GT&C Summary. If no filters have been selected, the .csv file will show all of your 
agency’s GT&C Summaries in any status. 

Note : At this time, the maximum amount of documents that can display in an Export Details report is 10,0 00. If you 
attempt to generate an export with more than 10,000 documents, the system will display a 10,000 line limit error 
message. If you receive the error message, please attempt to narrow down the search results on your Summary Page 
by using filters (i.e., display documents by month, year, etc.), then running separate reports. Once the separate reports 
have been run, you may consolidate them into a single file if you wish. 

 

How to Export GT&C Summaries or Details to a .CSV File: 

 

1. Log into G-Invoicing and click on either the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus. 

2. Click on the GT&C . 

3. When the GT&C Summary Page appears, click on either the Export Summary or Export Details buttons. 



4. Click on Open to display the .csv file immediately, or click Save to send the .csv file to a location on your machine or 
network. 

Note: If any given GT&C has an unusually large amount of Reference Data (Cost Centers, Business Units, or 
Department IDs) added to it (normally 500 or more), and is included on a GT&C Summary or Details report that is 
being run, the formatting in the .csv file may be disrupted. In the event this occurs, users must reformat the report on 
their own, if needed. 


About Orders 

The Order section of Interagency Agreement (IAA) Form 7600B provides specific details regarding the goods/services 
the Requesting Agency is purchasing from the Servicing Agency, and any related funding information. 

A Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency may create individual Orders manually in G-Invoicing, or may send Orders to 
G-Invoicing from its own Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system. In both cases, if subscribed to the Intragov Order 
Created or Changed Notification, G-Invoicing notifies Servicing Agency users of a new order creation or an existing 
order modification. 

Note: Please be aware that Order appearance may differ slightly depending on what internet browser you are using. 

 

 


Requesting Agency Orders Summary Page 

How to Access Orders Within G-Invoicing: 

 

1. Log into G-Invoicing, and click on the Requesting Agency drop-down menu. 

2. Click on Orders . 

The Orders Summary Page will appear. Depending on the number of Orders any given agency has entered into the 
system, it may take a few moments for the list of Orders to fully load. From the Summary Page, you should be able to 
access Orders based on the roles you have been granted in G-Invoicing. If a giant blank space appears under the 
Orders sub-tab after you click on it, and none of the Orders columns, rows, or buttons appear like they do in the screen 
shot below, please click here for instructions. 



 

The information displayed on the Orders Summary Page is organized into ten default columns that include Orders that 
are in any status. To narrow the amount of Orders that are visible on the summary page at any given time, to adjust 
how the Orders are organized on the page, or to display additional columns, please see the Searching for Orders topic. 

Column Name 

Description 

Order# 

Order numbers are auto-generated by G-Invoicing. You 
may access any Order by clicking on the Order# itself. 

An Order that has one or more attachments added to it 
will be indicated by a paperclip icon to the right of the 
Order number: 




GT&C# 

The GT&C number any given Order is generated off of. 

Order Originator 

Displays which agency is allowed to create Orders off of 
the GT&C: the Requesting Agency or the Servicing 
Agency. 

Period of Performance 
(POP) Start Date 

The Start POP date represents the first date the 
Servicing Agency fulfills the order and delivers the goods 
and/or services. 

 

Period of Performance 
(POP) End Date 

The End POP date represents the last day the Servicing 
Agency fulfills the order and delivers the goods and/or 
services. 

The Period of Performance End Date may include 
activities associated with closing out the delivery of 
goods and/or services. 

Requesting ALC 

Displays the ALC selected in the GT&C for the Requesting 
Agency. 

Requesting Group 

Displays the Requesting Agency Organization Group that 
was assigned to the Order. 

Servicing ALC 

Displays the ALC selected in the GT&C for the Servicing 
Agency. 

Servicing Group 

Displays the Servicing Agency Organization Group that 
was assigned to the Order. 

Status 

Displays the current status of the Order: 

All - Will display Orders in any status. 

Draft - A saved Draft of the Order that can be edited or 
completed at a later time. (Note: Orders in a Draft status 
are not visible to Servicing Agencies.) 

Closed - The Order is no longer available to take action 
on. 

Pending Requesting Approval - The Requesting 
Agency has yet to approve the Order. 

Pending Servicing Approval - The Servicing Agency 
has yet to approve the Order. 

Rejected - An agency has rejected the Order. 

Open - The Order is currently active, and can be used to 
obtain goods and/or services. 

Shared With Servicing - The Servicing Agency has yet 
to approve the Order. 


Servicing Agency Orders Summary Page 

How to Access Orders Within G-Invoicing: 

 

1. Log in to G-Invoicing, and click on the Servicing Agency drop-down menu. 

2. Click on Orders . 

The Orders Summary Page will appear. Depending on the number of Orders any given agency has entered into the 
system, it may take a few moments for the list of Orders to fully load. From the Summary Page, you should be able to 
access Orders based on the roles you have been granted in G-Invoicing. If a giant blank space appears under the 
Orders sub-tab after you click on it, and none of the Orders columns, rows, or buttons appear like they do in the screen 
shot below, please click here for instructions. 



 

The information displayed on the Orders Summary Page is organized into ten default columns that include Orders that 
are in any status. To narrow the amount of Orders that are visible on the summary page at any given time, to adjust 
how the Orders are organized on the page, or to display additional columns, please see the Searching for Orders topic. 

Column Name 

Description 

Order# 

Order numbers are auto-generated by G-Invoicing. You 
may access any Order by clicking on the Order# itself. 

An Order that has one or more attachments added to it 
will be indicated by a paperclip icon to the right of the 
Order number: 




GT&C# 

The GT&C number any given Order is generated off of. 

Order Originator 

Displays which agency is allowed to create Orders off of 
the GT&C: the Requesting Agency or the Servicing 
Agency. 

Period of Performance 
(POP) Start Date 

The Start POP date represents the first date the 
Servicing Agency fulfills the order and delivers the goods 
and/or services. 

 

Period of Performance 
(POP) End Date 

The End POP date represents the last day the Servicing 
Agency fulfills the order and delivers the goods and/or 
services. 

The Period of Performance End Date may include 
activities associated with closing out the delivery of 
goods and/or services. 

Requesting ALC 

Displays the ALC selected in the GT&C for the Requesting 
Agency. 

Requesting Group 

Displays the Requesting Agency Organization Group that 
was assigned to the Order. 

Servicing ALC 

Displays the ALC selected in the GT&C for the Servicing 
Agency. 

Servicing Group 

Displays the Servicing Agency Organization Group that 
was assigned to the Order. 

Status 

Displays the current status of the Order: 

All - Will display Orders in any status. 

Draft - A saved Draft of the Order that can be edited or 
completed at a later time. (Note: Orders in a Draft status 
are not visible to Servicing Agencies.) 

Closed - The Order is no longer available to take action 
on. 

Pending Requesting Approval - The Requesting 
Agency has yet to approve the Order. 

Pending Servicing Approval - The Servicing Agency 
has yet to approve the Order. 

Rejected - An agency has rejected the Order. 

Open - The Order is currently active, and can be used to 
obtain goods and/or services. 

Shared With Servicing - The Servicing Agency has yet 
to approve the Order. 


About Sending / Receiving Orders Between Agency ERPs and GInvoicing 


The Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency of a fully approved GT&C that is in an Open for Orders status may 
send/push multiple orders from its own Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system to G-Invoicing via web services 
instead of creating them manually through the G-Invoicing user interface (UI). Once an Order is pushed from a 
Requesting Agency's or Servicing Agency's ERP, the Order should automatically be created shortly in G-Invoicing. The 
trading partner should then be able to pull the Order from G-Invoicing into their own ERP via web services, add their 
own information to the Order, then push the Order from their own ERP back to G-Invoicing via web services. Requesting 
Agencies and Servicing Agencies also have the ability to retrieve/pull Orders from G-Invoicing into their own ERPs via 
web services. 

G-Invoicing requires that the agency that creates the Order includes their Funding Official and Program Official 
approvals on Orders created in an ERP, as they will not be able to complete their approvals through the G-Invoicing 
User Interface (UI). 

Please keep the following in mind when sending Orders from an ERP: 

- Once an Order is successfully created in G-Invoicing, the trading partner opens the Order through the G-Invoicing UI 
or their ERP, enters its own information, enters the required and optional Schedule Details information, and then 
completes its approvals; the trading partner may also make limited changes to the Order, if needed. (Please see the 
topics Creating an Order Manually as a Requesting Agency or Creating an Order Manually as a Servicing Agency for 
individual Schedule field descriptions.) 
- If the creating agency determines that a change to an Order that was submitted through their ERP is necessary, the 
creating agency may submit a corrected file (the creating agency cannot make manual changes to an Order submitted 
through an ERP in the G-Invoicing UI). When the creating agency submits a corrected file, the trading partner must 
re-approve the Order. 

For specific instructions on how to create and send an Order from an agency ERP to G-Invoicing (or how to pull an 
Order from G-Invoicing into an ERP), users should contact the ERP staff at their respective agencies directly. 


Search for an Order 

From the Orders Summary Page , you may search for Orders based on a variety of criteria, and may use filters to 
narrow the search results even further. 

How to Search for Orders: 

 

1. Click on either the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus. 

2. Click on Orders . The Orders Summary Page should appear. (Note: Depending on the number of orders any given 
agency has recorded in the system, it may take a few moments for the list of Orders to load on the Summary Page.) 

 

 

 

3. Use the boxes beneath each Column name (Order#, GT&C#, Status, etc.) to filter the orders that appear on the 
page. For example, if you are searching for a single order number such as O2107-017-017-021742, you can just type in 
the number four (4) in the box below the Order# column name, and the system will display orders that contain “4” in 
their names: 

 



 

Note : If you are entering a full Order number into the Order# search field, do not include the decimal point and any 
number that appears after it. Otherwise, it will not find the Order. 

 

- The Status column includes a drop-down menu that allows you to filter on a specific Order status: 

 




- Unless you select All, you may only filter search results by one specific Status value at a time. Also, you may need to 
scroll down the drop-down menu for additional statuses. 

4. If you wish to narrow the number of columns visible on the Orders Summary Page, click on the Selectable Columns 
box and select/deselect the columns you would like to add or remove from view: 

 



Note: If you decide to filter an Order search based on a given column value and then decide to hide that column from 
the Orders Summary Page, the system will still retain the search filter, even though it may not be visible on the screen. 
For example, if you performed an Order search based on a specific GT&C number, then decided to remove the GT&C# 
column from your view on the screen, the system will still display the Order search results based on the specific GT&C 
number you have selected as filter. 

Additional items to keep in mind about filtering items on the Orders Summary Page: 

- The up and down arrows located to the right of the column names allow you to arrange the information that appears 


in the columns by alphanumerical order (A-to-Z/Z-to-A or lowest-to-highest/highest-to-lowest). 

- If you have performed a search for Orders using filtering options on an Orders Summary Page, the system will not 
retain your search criteria once you log out of G-Invoicing. For example, if you selected to hide the Status column from 
a filter of an Orders Summary Page, and you log out of G-Invoicing, the Status column will reappear on that Orders 
Summary Page when you log back into the system. 

- Orders in a Draft status will only appear on the Order Summary Page for the agency (Requesting Agency or Servicing 
Agency) that created the Orders. 


Order Details 

To view additional details for each Order, Requesting and Servicing Agencies may click on any Order# from the Order 
Summary Page. As a default, the Partner Information section for the Order will display first. Each section of the Order 
will appear on the left-hand side of the page: 

 



 

 

- Click on any of the section names on the left-hand side of the page to access the following: 

 

Section Name 

Description 

Partner Information 

Displays ALCs for the Requesting and Servicing Agencies, along with any Group 
Names or Reference Data (i.e., Cost Center, Business Unit, and Department ID) 
information used for the Order. 

Authority 

Displays the Statutory and Program Authority information. 

Advance 

Displays the Advance Revenue and Payment information, if any. 

Delivery 

Displays information related to the negotiated terms of Performance reporting. 

Billing 

Displays information related to billing frequency and priority. 

Point of Contact 

Displays the contact information for the POC on the Order. 

Approvals 

Displays the contact information for the Order Approvers. 

Prepared By 

Displays the contact information for the person creating the Order. 

Line X 

Schedule X 

Clicking on either Line X or Schedule X will display the Line Items and Schedule 
Summaries of the Order. 

 

 

 

 

 


Viewing Orders in Process 

Orders may not be able to be Closed for several reasons. For example, an Order may have an unliquidated advance, an 
unpaid delivery, or a disputed delivery against it. G-Invoicing users may view all of these Orders in Process from 
either the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency Order Summary Pages. 

How to View Orders in Process: 

 

1. Click on either the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menu. 

2. Click on Orders . 

3. Click on the Orders in Process button. 



 

4. A list of Orders in Process will display: 



From the Orders in Process list, you should be able to see the appropriate Order numbers, their Delivery Status, the 
amount of the Order Imbalance, their Age (in days), the number of days until the Constructive Receipt is triggered, and 
the Requesting and Servicing ALCs on the Orders. 


Sending / Receiving Orders between Agency ERPs and G-INV 

For specific instructions on how to create and send an Order via web services from an agency Enterprise Resource 
Planning (ERP) system to G-Invoicing (or how to receive an Order via web services from G-Invoicing to an agency ERP), 
users should contact the ERP staff of their respective agencies directly. 

 

 


Creating an Order Manually as a Requesting Agency 

A Requesting Agency can manually create an Order directly from a GT&C that is in an Open for Orders status. 

CRITICAL NOTE : To be able to create an Order off of a GT&C, the Group that has been assigned to the GT&C and the 
Order must have at least one Treasury Account Symbol (TAS) Filter created for it. For more information regarding 
Groups and TAS Filters, please speak to one of your agency's administrators. 

 

How to Manually Create a New Order from an Approved GT&C as a Requesting Agency: 

 

1. Log in to G-Invoicing, click on the Requesting Agency drop-down menu, and click on GT&C . A list of GT&Cs 
appears. 

2. In the GT&C# column, click the link for a GT&C with a status of Open for Orders . The GT&C will then open. 

3. Click on the Create Order button at the bottom of the page: 



 

- The Create Order default page will appear. As a default, the Create Order Page will open on the Partner 
Information section of the Order form. 

- Please note that while multiple ALCs may be been placed in a GT&C, an Order may only be created using one ALC. 
Also, depending on what information was used on the GT&C for the Servicing Agency, the Servicing Agency Group name 
and ALC may auto-populate on the Order. 

- You may click on the GT&C# highlighted in blue to display summary information for the GT&C. 

 




 

4. Complete the fields near the top of the Order form based on information provided in the table below: 

 

 Field Name 

Description 

Assisted 
Acquisitions 
Indicator 
(Required) 

Select Yes or No from the drop-down menu based on the IAA 
information entered into the GT&C. 

Period of 
Performance 
(PoP) Start 
Date 
(Required) 

Click on the empty PoP Start Date field. When the calendar box 
appears, select the appropriate date. You may use the arrows near 
the top of the calendar box to skip ahead to a future month, or to go 
back to a previous month. You may also click on the Month and Year 
drop-down menus to select specific a month or year. Alternatively, 
you may enter a date by hand in the open field at the top of the 
calendar box using this format: yyyy-mm-dd . If the month and the 
arrows are not visible to you on the calendar box, please lower the 
zoom level on your internet browser and/or computer screen. 

The Start POP date represents the first date the Servicing Agency 
fulfills the order and delivers the goods and/or services. The 
Performance Period may include activities associated with closing out 
the delivery of goods and/or services. 

Note: The date must be within the GT&C dates. 

PoP End Date 
(Required) 

Click on the empty PoP End Date field. When the calendar box 
appears, select the appropriate date. You may use the arrows near 
the top of the calendar box to skip ahead to a future month, or to go 
back to a previous month. You may also click on the Month and Year 
drop-down menus to select specific a month or year. Alternatively, 
you may enter a date by hand in the open field at the top of the 
calendar box using this format: yyyy-mm-dd . If the month and the 
arrows are not visible to you on the calendar box, please lower the 
zoom level on your internet browser and/or computer screen. 

The End POP date represents the last day the Servicing Agency fulfills 
the order and delivers the goods and/or services. The Performance 
Period may include activities associated with closing out the delivery 
of goods and/or services. 

Note: The date must be within the GT&C dates. 

 

 

 

5. Complete the fields in the Partner Information section of the Order based on information provided in the table 
below: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Agency 

The Agency Account names will automatically be filled in based on the 


Account 

agencies named on the GT&C. 

Requesting 
Agency Group 
Name & 
Description 

Select a Group Name from the drop-down menu. (The Description for 
each Group will be separated by a dash after the Group Name.) 

 

Note : Only Group Names that have been assigned to the Requesting 
Order Manager or Creator roles in a user account will appear in the 
Group Name drop-down menu. If a Group does not appear for you 
and you believe it should, please contact one of your agency's User 
Administrators for assistance. 

Requesting 
Agency ALC 

If a single ALC was entered into the GT&C, the ALC will auto-populate 
in this field. 

If more than one ALC was included on the ALC, you may select an 
ALC by clicking on the field and scrolling through the list of available 
ALCs, or you may search of an ALC by typing in an ALC number in 
the search field with the magnifying glass above the list of ALC 
numbers. 

Requesting 
Agency Cost 
Center 
(Optional) 

Requesting Agency Cost Center information available in the dropdown 
list will depend on the Cost Center information entered in the 
GT&C. 

Requesting 
Agency 
Business Unit 
(Optional) 

Requesting Agency Business Unit information available in the dropdown 
list will depend on the Business Unit information entered in the 
GT&C. 

Requesting 
Agency 
Department 
ID (Optional) 

Requesting Agency Department ID information available in the dropdown 
list will depend on the Department ID information entered in 
the GT&C. 

Servicing 
Agency Group 
Name & 
Description 

Select a Group Name from the drop-down menu. (The Description for 
each Group will be separated by a dash after the Group Name.) 

If a Group does not appear for you and you believe it should, please 
contact your trading partner for assistance. 

Servicing 
Agency ALC 

If a single ALC is available for the Servicing Agency, it will autopopulate 
in this field. 

If more than one ALC is available for the Servicing Agency, you may 
select an ALC by clicking on the field and scrolling through the list of 
available ALCs, or you may search of an ALC by typing in an ALC 
number in the search field with the magnifying glass above the list of 
ALC numbers. 

Servicing 
Agency Cost 
Center 

Servicing Agency Cost Center information will only be available to the 
Servicing Agency. 

Servicing 
Agency 
Business Unit 

Servicing Agency Business Unit information will only be available to 
the Servicing Agency. 

Servicing 
Agency 
Department 
ID (Optional) 

Servicing Agency Department ID information will only be available to 
the Servicing Agency. 

Order Tracking 
Number 

Enter an internal tracking number for your agency, if applicable. 
Maximum value: 50 characters. 

Unique Entity 
ID 

A distinct identifier which is used to identify a specific Government 
entity. Must be exactly 12 characters. 

Funding Office 
Code 

Identifier of the level 1 organization that provided the preponderance 
of the funds obligated by this transaction. 6 characters. 

Funding 
Agency Code 

Identifier of the level 2 organization that provided the preponderance 
of the funds obligated by this transaction. 4 characters. 

Comments 

Any additional comments associated with the Order. 1000 character 
maximum. 


 

 

6. Click on the Authority section on the left side of the page , and fill in the appropriate fields based on the information 
in provided in the table below: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Corresponding field 
on the IAA 7600B 
form 

Program 
Authority 

 

 

Program Authority 
Title 

This is the title associated with the 
authority that grants the 
Requesting/Servicing Agency program 
authority. 

Enter a Requesting Agency Program 
Authority Title, up to 100 characters. 

Block #20 

Program Authority 
Citation 

This is the citation associated with the 
authority that grants the Requesting 
Agency/Servicing program authority. 

Enter a Requesting Agency Program 
Authority Citation of up to 100 
characters. 

Block #21 

Statutory 
Authority 

 

 

Statutory 
Authority Fund 
Type Code 
(Required) 

Select the appropriate fund type: 

Franchise Fund 

Revolving Fund 

Working Capital Fund 

Economy Act 

Other Authority 

Block #17 

Statutory 
Authority Fund 
Type Title 
(Conditional) 

 

Enter the statutory authority title, up 
to 100 characters. 

This field is required if Economy Act is 
not the Statutory Authority Fund Type. 

Block #18 

Statutory 
Authority Fund 
Type Citation 
(Conditional) 

Enter the statutory authority citation, 
up to 100 characters. 

This field is required if Economy Act is 
not the Statutory Authority Fund Type. 

Block #19 

 

- For additional information regarding Statutory Authority, please see the available Excel spread sheet provided in the 
Interagency Agreement (IAA) section here . 

 

7. Requesting Agencies should skip the Advance section of the Order as the Advance fields may only be filled in by the 
Servicing Agency. 

 

8. Click on the Delivery section on the left side of the page , and fill in the appropriate fields based on the information in 
provided in the table below: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

FOB Point (Required) 

The Freight On Board (FOB) Point identifies the Buyer 
and Seller agreed upon method for transfer of 
ownership. 


FOB largely determines which Performance reporting 
rules are applied for Order settlement, and ultimately 
which Performance transactions will trigger Order 
settlement. 

Select one of the following options where the transfer of 
responsibility for the goods will occur: 

Source/Origin – Transfer of ownership and Settlement 
occurs when the Servicing Agency reports Performance; 
Source should be used when the Servicing Agency 
wishes to control settlement. 

Destination – Transfer of ownership occurs when a 
Requesting Agency reports Performance; Settlement is 
then triggered when a Buyer reports Performance or 
theConstructive Receipt Days haved passed/occurred, 
whichever happens first. Destination should be used 
when a Requesting Agency wishes to control settlement, 
and the Servicing Agency will be delivering goods or 
services to their final destination. 

Other –This is treated the same as FOB Destination. 
However, “Other” should only be used when a Servicing 
Agency is delivering goods or services to a location that 
is somewhere between origin and destination. 

CRITICAL NOTE : It is important to select the proper 
FOB Point as it will have a great impact on Performance . 

 

Constructive Receipt Days 
(Conditional) 

The CRD field is required to be filled in if the FOB Point 
has been selected as Destination or Other . 

CRDs are the number of elapsed calendar days (from the 
Servicing Agency's delivered/performed action) after 
which received/accepted is assumed to occur by the 
Requesting Agency. The maximum amount of days that 
can be entered is 90. 

Note : This field can only be entered and/or modified by 
the Requesting Agency. 

Acceptance Point 

Select one of the following options where the acceptance 
of responsibility for the goods occurs: 

 

Source/Origin 

 

Destination 

Place of Acceptance 

Enter the location (physical address) at which the goods 
or services will be accepted by the Requesting Agency. 
(Maximum of 100 alphanumeric characters.) 

Inspection Point 

Select one of the following options where the inspection 
of the goods occurs: 

 

Source/Origin 

 

Destination 

Place of Inspection 

This is the location (physical address) at which the goods 
or services will be inspected by the Requesting Agency. 
(Maximum of 100 alphanumeric characters.) 

 

9. Click on the Billing section on the left side of the page , and fill in the appropriate fields based on the information in 
provided in the table below: 


Field Name 

Description 

Priority Order Indicator 

Identifies whether the Order is a high priority. 

Select either Yes or No from the drop-down menu. 

Capital Planning and 
Investment Control 

Identifies whether the Information Technology (IT) goods 
or services have been screened to ensure compliance 
with CPIC requirements. This is an indicator that 
identifies if the goods will become a capital asset (if Yes 
is selected) or an expense (if No is selected). 

Select either Yes or No from the drop-down menu. 

 

If unknown at time of brokering, agencies may leave this 
field blank. 

 

This value may be changed by Administrative 
Modification , which will not require reapproval. 

 

10. Click on the Point of Contact section on the left side of the page , and fill in the appropriate fields based on the 
information in provided in the table below: 

Field Name 

Description 

Name (Required) 

Enter the full name of the Requesting Agency Point of 
Contact (POC). 

Email (Required) 

Enter an official email address for the Requesting Agency 
POC. 

Phone (Required) 

Enter a phone number for the Requesting Agency POC. 

Fax 

Enter a fax number for the Requesting Agency POC. 

 

Note: The Servicing Agency values for the Point of Contact fields will not appear until they are filled in by the Servicing 
Agency. 

 

 

11. Click on the Prepared By section on the left side of the page. The fields below should be automatically filled in for 
the Requesting Agency Preparer of the Order: 

Field Name 

Description 

Name 

The full name of the person creating the Order. 

Phone 

The business phone number of the person creating the 
Order. 

Email 

The official email address for the person creating the 
Order. 

 

 

Entering Line Items 

The Requesting Agency uses the Line Item Details Page to complete the line item information for the Order. 

How to Enter Line Item Details: 

1. Click on Line 1 in the menu on the left-hand side of the page . A Line Item Summary for the first line item of the 
Order will display, along with a Schedule Summary : 




 

 

- By clicking on the arrow to the left of the Line # field, you can toggle the Schedule Summary on or off. 

- By clicking on the arrow to the left of the Schedule # field, you can toggle the detailed Schedule information on or 
off. 

Please note that since you are creating a new Order, the Line Item and Schedule Summaries will display several blank 
fields at this time; the fields will automatically be filled in once you start to enter specific Order data. 

A Line Item Summary will display the following information: 

Field Name 

Description 

Line# 

Line number of the order, sequentially starting at 1 

Orders processed through ERP systems can use a 
different convention. 

Status 

The current status of the Line Item should be 
automatically filled in. 

Item Code 

The Product Service Code/Federal Supply Code for the 
item or service associated with the Order. 

Description 

A description of the goods or service. 

Units of Measure (UOM) 

Standard unit or system of units by which a quantity is 
accounted for and expressed. 

Product/Service Identifier 

This is the National Stock Number (NSN) or other 
pertinent information associated with the Shipment. 

Capitalized Asset 

Indicates whether or not this item is a capitalized asset 
or not by displaying True or False . 

Type of Service Required 

Severable - Services that are continuing and ongoing, 
such as help-desk support, janitorial services, for which 
the agency receives a benefit each time the service 
renders. 

Non Severable - Work that results in a final product and 
for which a benefit occurs only when the entire project is 
complete, such as systems design. 

Not Applicable 

Line Quantity 

The total number of units of the corresponding 
schedules. 

Total Line Costs 

The sum of the Line costs. 

Advance Amount 

The total amount of the advance for this Order line. 

Net Due Amount 

Net amount due for this line item once the order line is 
fully invoiced 

It is the difference between the Obligation and Advance 
Amount. 

 

2. Click on the notepad/pencil icon in the Line # field to enter or update the appropriate Line Item Summary fields 


based on the information in the table below: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Status 

The current status of the Line Item should be 
automatically filled in. 

Item Code (Required) 

Enter the Product Service Code/Federal Supply Code for 
the item or service associated with the Order. 

Description (Required) 

Enter a description of the goods or service. Maximum 
character limit: 240. 

Units of Measure (UOM) 

 

(Required) 

For Reimbursable Agreements, enter the unit of 
measure for each Order Line, if applicable. (Example: 
EA-Each, GA-Gallon, LB-Pound, DO-U.S. Dollars). 

As you enter in characters for the UOM, a drop-down 
menu will appear with several UOMs to choose from 
when applicable. 

A complete list of currently available UOMs is available 
here . 

UOM Description 
(Required) 

The basic description of the unit of measure being 
exchanged . This field will automatically be filled in once 
a UOM is selected. 

Product/Service Identifier 
(Optional) 

This is an optional field to capture additional identifier 
information and it may be agency specific. For example, 
DoD agencies may use the National Stock Number 
(NSN), or GSA customers may use a GSA item or 
service code. 

Capitalized Asset 
Indicator (Required) 

Specifies when the Servicing Agency considers the line 
item to be a capitalized asset. An item is capitalized 
when it is recorded as an asset, rather than an expense. 
This means that the expenditure will appear in the 
balance sheet, rather than the income statement. 
Agencies may have their own guidance for when items 
are capitalized. 

Select True or False from the drop-down menu. 

UID Required Indicator 

Specifies whether or not the item requires a unique item 
identifier (UID) marking. 

Please select either Y for Yes or N for No. 

Type of Service 
Requirements (Required) 

Select from the following: 

Severable - Services provided on an on-going, as 
needed, or recurring basis and that meet a need of the 
Government at the time they are delivered. When the 
need for a portion of recurring or continuing services 
arises in the fiscal year subsequent to the one in which 
the services were initially funded, that portion is 
severable and chargeable to appropriations available for 
obligation in the subsequent fiscal year. A service is 
severable if it can be separated into components that 
independently meet a need of the government. 
Examples include help-desk support, maintenance, or 
janitorial services, which are continuous and recurring in 
nature. 

Non Severable - Services which constitute a specific, 
entire job or single undertaking with a defined endproduct 
that cannot feasibly be subdivided for separate 
performance. Accordingly, non-severable services must 
be financed entirely out of the appropriation current at 
the time of award, even though performance may 
extend into future fiscal years. A service is nonseverable 
if the service produces a single or unified 


outcome, product, or report that cannot be subdivided 
for separate performance in difference fiscal years. 
Examples include system design, building conversion or 
environmental study. 

Not Applicable 

 

3. When you are finished completing all applicable fields, click Ok. (Clicking on Cancel returns you to the previous 
page.) 

How to Add Additional Line Items: 

To add additional Line Items to an Order: 

- If you are in the process of creating an Order, and would like to add additional Line Items to it: 

1. Click on the Add Line button located just below the list of existing Line Items in the Line Item Summary. 

A new line should then appear below the last Line Item created. 

- If you would like to add a Line Item to an Order that is in a Draft status: 

1. Click on the Orders drop-down menu. 

2. Click on the Order # of the Order you would like to perform work on. 

3. Click on one of the Lines displayed in the menu on the left-hand side of the page. 

4. Click on the Add Line button. 

A new line should then appear below the last Line Item created. 

 

Copying Line Items 

 

How to Copy a Line Item: 

 

1. Select an existing Line Item, and click on the “Double Page” icon in the Line # column: 

 



 

2. An exact copy of the Line Item will be added to the Order underneath the original Line Item. 

If you make a copy of a Line Item that is in itself a copy, then the new Line Item will appear under the previous copy. 

 


Deleting Line Items 

 

How to Delete Line Items: 

To delete line items during the draft phase of an Order creation: 

1. Click on the garbage can icon located in the Line # field of any given Line Item. The Remove Line box will appear. 

2. Click on Yes to delete the Line Item from the Order. (Clicking on No returns you to the Line.). Alternatively, you may 
click on the “X” in the top right-hand corner of the box to dismiss the Remove Line request. 

3. Once you click Yes, the line will be removed from the Order. 

Note : After a line is created, it may not be deleted once the Order has been saved or updated. Instead, it may be 
Cancelled . 

 

Cancelling and Restoring Line Items 

A Line that has been created may not be Deleted once the Order has been saved; however, it may be Cancelled . 
Please be aware that cancelling a Line does not remove the line from view. Once a line is cancelled, the status of the 
line changes to “C”, and several fields on the line will display “0”. If the cancelled Line has a Schedule associated with it, 
the status of the Schedule will display as “Cancelled”. Once a Line has been cancelled, the remaining information 
displayed on it and any associated Schedule will be ignored by the system. 

A Line that has been cancelled may be Restored to an Active status if needed (see below). 

 

How to Cancel Line Items: 

1. Click on the garbage can icon located in the Line # field of any given Line Item that you wish to Cancel. The Cancel 
Line box will appear. 

2. Click on Yes to cancel the Line Item. (Clicking on No will return you to the Line.) Alternatively, you may click on the 
“X” in the top right-hand corner of the box to dismiss the Cancel Line request. 

Once you click Yes, the Line will be cancelled. Please note that the Net Order and Total Order Amounts will not reflect 
the changes until you save or update the Order draft. 

 

How to Restore a Cancelled Line Item: 

Once a Line is cancelled, it may be Restored to an Active status. 

1. Click on the garbage can icon with the white arrow inside of it. The Restore Line box will appear. 

2. Click on Yes to restore the Line Item. (Clicking on No will return you to the Line.) Alternatively, you may click on the 
“X” in the top right-hand corner of the box to dismiss the Restore Line request. 

3. Once you click Yes, the Line will be restored, and all of the fields will display their previous values before the Line was 
cancelled. Please note that the Net Order and Total Order Amounts will not reflect the changes until you save or update 
the Order draft. 

 

Entering Schedules 

For each Line Item created, the Requesting Agency will use the Schedule Details page to complete the Schedule 
information for the Order. 


To display the Schedule Summary for each individual Line Item : 

 

1. Click on the arrow to the left of the Line # field in any Line Item to display the Schedule Summary. Alternatively, 
you may click on the Schedule link located in the menu on the left side of the page under any Line Item listed: 



 

A Schedule Summary will display information noted in the table below. Please note that several Schedule Summary 
fields will remain empty until information is added to the Schedule itself. 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Schedule # 

Selected order schedule number. 

Status 

Current status of the line item. 

Unit Cost 

The cost of each unit. 

Quantity 

The total number of units for this schedule. 

Amount 

The total amount of this schedule (Unit Cost x Quantity). 

Advance Pay Indicator 

Indicates whether or not this Order involves an Advance payment. 

 

 

How to Enter Schedule Details: 

 

1. From the Schedule Summary , click on the arrow to the left of the Schedule # field. The Schedule Details fields 
will display: 




 

 

2. Fill out the appropriate fields in each section of the Schedule based on information provided in the table below. 
Please note that once information is entered into certain Schedule fields, the information displayed in related Schedule 
Summary fields will automatically be updated. 

 

 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Schedule 

 

Unit Cost (Required) 

The cost of the unit. 

Quantity (Required) 

The total number of units for this schedule. 

Advance Pay Indicator 
(Conditional) 

 

This field is only required if Advance was noted on the GT&C. 
(If it was not, this field will default to a selection of No.) 

If Advance was noted on the GT&C, select Yes or No from the 
drop-down menu. 

Funding Information 

 

Treasury Account 
Symbol 

 

(See Description to the 
right for required 
values) 

Enter the Treasury Account Symbol (TAS) for the Requesting 
Agency by clicking on the magnifying glass icon on the right 
side of the field. You may select the proper TAS from the dropdown 
menu, or you may manually enter each TAS component 
in the appropriate boxes. 

The TAS is a grouping of three specific United States 
Department of the Treasury funding-related codes that identify 
specific United States Department of the Treasury accounts 
using receipt, appropriation, expenditure, and other fund 
account symbols and titles as assigned by the United States 
Department of the Treasury and the Office of Management and 
Budget. 

Required values : AID (3 digits), MAIN (4 digits), and SUB 
(3 digits) 

BETC (Required) 

Select the appropriate BETC from the drop-down menu. 

The BETC is up to an eight-character code used in the Central 
Accounting Reporting System (CARS) to indicate the type of 
activity being reported (borrowing, repayment, offsetting 


collection, receipt, disbursement, etc.). This code must 
accompany the TAS and the dollar amounts to classify the 
transaction against the fund balance with the United States 
Department of the Treasury. Depending on the TAS selected, 
the BETCs available for the Requesting Agency are DISGF and 
DISNGF . 

For more information on the General Fund disbursement 
BETCs, please contact the General Fund group at 
GeneralFund@fiscal.treasury.gov 

 

Object Class Code 

Select an object class code from the drop-down menu. 

The Federal Government uses an Object Class Code to record 
its financial transactions according to the nature of the services 
provided or received when obligations first incur. 

Additional Accounting 
Classification 

Add any additional accounting information required for agency 
internal tracking purposes, if needed (320 alphanumeric 
characters maximum). 

Bona Fide Need 

Please enter sufficient information to describe and support the 
transaction (150 alphanumeric characters maximum). 

SLOA (see below) 

 

 

Use the Standard Line of Accounting (SLOA) fields to enter or edit identification codes used by the Requesting Agency or 
the Servicing Agency. The SLOA’s variable length and alphanumeric codes provide a uniform system of reference 
information to the agency’s original obligating document and verify that billings are properly charged. Shown on all 
purchase requests, resulting obligation and expenditure documents, SLOA codes convey key accounting information, 
such as the department within the agency using the funds, the specific appropriation charged for the purchase of 
goods/services, the organization responsible for accounting and reporting of the obligation and payment, and the 
payment type for the specific transaction. 

 

 The SLOA fields include fiscal year dates, accounting codes, and agency disbursing identification. SLOA information 
allows G-Invoicing to pass two lines of accounting data to IPAC: one line for the Requesting Agency, and one line for the 
Servicing Agency. 

 

Note : SLOA fields are formatted for use by the Department of Defense (DoD) and follow Standard Financial Information 
Structure (SFIS); however, they may be used optionally by other trading partners to record additional information such 
as internal accounting strings. 

 

How To Enter SLOA Information : 

 

3. Fill in the appropriate fields in the SLOA section based on the information provided in the table below: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Source Reference 

Accounting 
Classification 
Reference 
Number 

Enter the Requesting Agency 
Accounting Classification Reference 
Number (ACRN). 

Maximum length is 2 alphanumeric 
characters. 

The ACRN comprises first of ten 
elements in a line of accounting. The 
two-digit ACRN identifies each separate 
line of accounting classification data on 
a document citing fund usage to 
ensure that the expenditure properly 
matches the corresponding obligation. 
Assign an ACRN to each line of 
accounting classification data starting 
with “AA.” When there is only one line 
of accounting classification data, the 
ACRN is “AA.” Assign alphanumeric 
ACRNs when alpha codes are 
exhausted. The alpha characters “I” 
and “O” are not used because these 
characters can be confused with ‘0” 
and “1”. Duplication of ACRNs does not 
occur within the same funding 

 


document. 

Reimbursable 
Flag 

The Reimbursable Indicator is a single 
alphabetical code used to flag those 
expenditures incurred for a designated 
TAFS account that are considered 
reimbursable to the account. 

A9 in the Standard Financial 
Information Structure (SFIS) 
; Examples: Direct, (D) or 
Reimbursable (R) Code, 

Federal Award 
Identification 
Number 

The Federal Award Identification 
Number (FAIN) is a unique number 
assigned to a financial assistance 
award by the awarding agency. This 
number will identify the award in 
several systems including: ASAP.gov, 
USASpending.gov, and Grants.gov. 
This number along with the CFDS will 
allow for more precise tracking of grant 
obligations and payments. Maximum 
length is 30 characters. 

 

Unique Record 
Identifier 

An agency defined identifier that (when 
provided) is unique for every reported 
action. Maximum length is 70 
characters. 

 

Activity Address 
Code 

The Activity Address Code (AAC) used 
for shipping location. Maximum length 
is 6 characters. 

 

Budget Line 
Item 

Enter a 16-character alphanumeric 
code that further sub-divides the 
Treasury Account Fund Symbol 
appropriation, below the Budget Sub 
Activity Line. 

For military personnel, value is Budget 
Sub-Activity (BSA) plus Budget Line 
Item (BLI). 

B4 in SFIS; Further 
subdivides the Treasury 
Account Fund Symbol below 
sub-activity 

e.g., 111 

Budget Fiscal 
Year 

Enter a 4-digit year. The budget or 
financial year, as opposed to a 
calendar year. The U.S. Government's 
fiscal year runs from October 1 of the 
prior year through September 30 of 
the next year. For example, FY 2015 
was from October 2014 through 
September 2015. 

e.g., 2018 

Security 
Cooperation 

(formerly 
Foreign Military 
Sales (FMS) 
Customer 
Code) 

The Security Cooperation Customer 
represents the country receiving the 
product and/or service in the FMS 
transaction. Maximum length is 3 
characters. 

T21 in SFIS; Security 
Cooperation (SC) Customer 

 

Security 
Cooperation 
Implementation 
Agency 

A single character alphabetical code 
which identifies the US Military 
Department or Agency which has 
negotiated or facilitated a foreign 
military sales case on behalf of the US 
Government. The majority of FMS 
cases are implemented by the Army 
(IA Code B), Navy (IA Code P) or Air 
Force (IA Code D) 

T27 in SFIS; Identifies the 
U.S. military department or 
agency that is executing the 
sale on behalf of the U.S. 
Government 

e.g., B=Army, D=Air Force, 
P=Navy 

Security 
Cooperation 
Case 
Designator 

Enter a 3 or 4 character alphanumeric 
code. A Security Cooperation Case 
Designator is used to reflect a FMS 
contractural sales agreement (Letter of 
Offer and Acceptance) between the US 
and an eligible foreign country 

T22 in SFIS; 

e.g., UAK 

Security 

The Security Cooperation Case Line 

 


Cooperation 
Case Line Item 
Identifier 

Item Identifier is used to identify a 
detailed line item requirement 
contained within the (Letter of Offer 
and Acceptance). 

Sub-Allocation 

Identifies an organization to which 
funds have been Sub-Allocated. 
Maximum length is 4 characters. 

Use of this data element is exclusive to 
sub-allocation purposes, useful for 
Financial Reporting. 

e.g.,2054 

Accounting 
Identifier 

The Agency Accounting Identifier Code 
identifies the accounting system 
responsible for recording the 
accounting event. The Agency 
Accounting Identifier Code is intended 
to be an accounting system identifier, 
and therefore must be assigned to only 
one accounting system. Maximum 
length is 6 characters. 

O3 in SFIS; Fiscal Station 
Number; Comptroller 
defined, e.g., 021001 

Funding Center 
Identifier 

Enter a 16-character alphanumeric 
code. A Funding Center is a clearly 
defined responsibility area within an 
organizational unit to which budget 
authority is assigned 

Cost Object/Cost Accounting 
(CA) section in SFIS, e.g., Air 
Force = OAC, OBAN 

Cost Center 
Identifier 

Enter a 16-character alphanumeric 
code. A Cost Center is a clearly defined 
responsibility area where costs are 
incurred. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Navy = BCN 

Project 
Identifier 

Enter a 25-character code. A planned 
undertaking of work to be performed 
or product to be produced having a 
finite beginning and end. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Army = WBS 

Activity 
Identifier 

Enter a 16-character code. An Activity 
is a series of events, tasks, or units of 
work that are linked to perform a 
specific objective. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Army = Activity/Network 

Disburser 
Identifier 

Enter a 8-digit number. The Agency 
Disbursing Identifier is assigned to 
each disbursing office by the United 
States Department of the Treasury. It 
is an identification number that 
indicates authority to receive and 
disburse public funds and issue checks 
on the United States Department of 
the Treasury. 

 

Cost Element 
Code 

Enter a 15-character alphanumeric 
code. A Cost Element is a classification 
of an organization's revenues, 
expenses or consumable 
resources. Cost Element Code only 
relates to primary cost. Cost Element 
Code does not relate to secondary cost 
which is identified as agency specific 
and not enterprise-level. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Army = Commitment Item 

Work Order 
Number 

Enter a 16-character alphanumeric 
code that identifies an individual unit 
of work, batch, or lot of a distinct 
product or service. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Army = Internal Order, Air 
Force = Job Order 

Functional Area 

Enter a 16-character alphanumeric 
code. A Functional Area is a logical 
division of a Component's business 
operations. It represents the 
Functions the Component performs. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Army = Functional Area, Air 
Force = Budget/Project 


Parent Award 
Identifier 
(PAID) 

The identifier of the procurement 
award under which the specific award 
is issued (such as a Federal Supply 
Schedule). Term currently applies to 
procurement actions only. Maximum 
length is 50 characters. 

 

Procurement 
Instrument 
Identifier (PIID) 

The unique identifier for each contract, 
agreement or order. Maximum length 
is 50 characters. 

 

 

 

4. Fill in the appropriate Shipping Information fields based on the information provided in the table below: 

 

Shipping Information 

 

Address Identifier 

A code that identifies the end point of the shipment or the 
location the service is being performed. 

Agency Title 

The name of the agency at the ship to location. 

Address 1 (Conditional) 

1st address line associated with shipment. This information 
must be entered if any other shipping information has been 
provided. 

Address 2 

2nd address line associated with shipment 

Address 3 

3rd address line associated with shipment 

City (Conditional) 

This information must be entered if any other shipping 
information has been provided. The name of the city of the 
ship to location. 

Postal Code 
(Conditional) 

This information must be entered if the destination country for 
the Order is the US. 

The 5-digit (ZIP) code that geographically identifies individual 
Post Offices or metropolitan area delivery stations associated 
with every mailing address. 

State (Conditional) 

The name of the state of the ship to location. 

This information must be entered if the destination country for 
the Order is the US. 

Country (Conditional) 

The name of the country of the ship to location. 

This information must be entered if any other shipping 
information has been provided. 

Location Description 

The description of the ship to location (i.e.: military base, 
airport, etc.) 

Special Shipping 
Information 

Optional text field to include additional Shipping Information for 
the Delivery of Products. Enter specific information for 
shipping, shipping company, date/time, special instructions, 
etc. 

Delivery POC Name 

The name of the Point of Contact the shipment is being 
delivered to. 

Delivery POC Title 

Optional text field for the title of the Point of Contact the 
shipment is being delivered to. 

Delivery POC Email 

Enter the email address for the Point of Contact the shipment is 
being delivered to. 

Deliver POC Phone 

Enter the phone number for the Point of Contact the shipment 
is being delivered to. 

Additional Info 

Enter any additional information not covered in other areas 

 

How to Add Additional Schedules to Line Items: 

 

To add additional Schedules to an Order: 


- If you are in the process of creating an Order, and would like to add additional Schedules to it before saving the Order 
as a Draft: 

1. Click on the Add Schedule button located just below the list of existing Schedules under the Schedule Summary . 
(Note : If you have the list of Schedule Details already expanded, you may scroll all the way to the bottom of the details 
list and click on the Add Schedule button). 

A new line should then appear below the last Schedule created. 

- If you would like to add a Schedule to an Order that is in a Draft status: 

1. From the Requesting Agency drop-down menu, click on Orders . 

2. Click on the Order # of the Order you would like to perform work on. 

3. Click on one of the Lines displayed in the menu on the left-hand side of the page. 

4. Click on the Add Schedule button. 

A new line should then appear below the last Schedule created. 

 

Copying Schedules 

You may make an exact copy of an existing Schedule and add it to the Order. 

How to Copy a Schedule: 

 

1. Select an existing Schedule, and click on the “Double Page” icon in the Schedule # column: 



2. An exact copy of the Schedule will be added to the Order underneath the original Schedule. 

If you make a copy of a Schedule that is in itself a copy, then the new Schedule will appear under the previous copy. 

 

Deleting Schedules 

 

How to Delete Schedules: 

 


To delete Schedules during the Draft phase of an Order creation: 

1. Click on the garbage can icon located in the Schedule # field of any given Schedule. The Remove Schedule box 
will appear. 

2. Click on either Yes or No to delete the Schedule from the Line Item. Alternatively, you may click on the “X” in the 
top right-hand corner of the box to dismiss the Remove Schedule request. 

Note : After a schedule is created, it may not be deleted once the Order has been saved or updated. Instead, it may be 
Cancelled (see below). 

 

Cancelling and Restoring Schedules 

A Schedule that has been created may not be Deleted once the Order has been saved, however, it may be Cancelled . 
Please be aware that cancelling a Schedule does not remove the line from view. Once a Schedule is cancelled, the 
status of the Schedule changes to “Cancelled”. Please be aware that if a Line that has a Schedule associated with it is 
cancelled, the status of the associated Schedule will automatically change to “Cancelled”. Once a Schedule has been 
cancelled, the remaining information displayed on it will be ignored by the system. 

Note : A Line must have at least one active schedule on it. If you attempt to Cancel the only Schedule associated to a 
Line, an error message will display. 

A Schedule that has been cancelled may be Restored to an Active status if needed (see below). 

How to Cancel Schedules: 

1. Click on the garbage can icon located in the Schedule # field of any given Schedule that you wish to Cancel. The 
Cancel Schedule box will appear. 

2. Click on Yes to cancel the Schedule. (Clicking on No will return you to the Schedule.) Alternatively, you may click on 
the “X” in the top right-hand corner of the box to dismiss the Cancel Schedule request. 

Once you click Yes, the Schedule will be cancelled. 

 

 

How to Restore a Cancelled Schedule: 

Once a Schedule is cancelled, it may be Restored to an Active status. 

1. Click on the blue garbage can icon with the white arrow inside of it. The Restore Schedule box will appear. 

2. Click on Yes to restore the Schedule. (Clicking on No will return you to the Schedule.) Alternatively, you may click on 
the “X” in the top right-hand corner of the box to dismiss the Restore Schedule request. 

Once you click Yes, the Schedule will be restored. 

Once An Order Has Been Completed: 

 

Once an Order has been completed by the Requesting Agency, it may be sent for Approval . 


Creating an Order Manually as a Servicing Agency 

A Servicing Agency can manually create an Order directly from a GT&C that is in an Open for Orders status. 

CRITICAL NOTE : To be able to create an Order off of a GT&C, the Group that has been assigned to the GT&C and the 
Order must have at least one Treasury Account Symbol (TAS) Filter created for it. For more information regarding 
Groups and TAS Filters, please speak to one of your agency's administrators. 

 

How to Manually Create a New Order from an Approved GT&C as a Servicing Agency: 

 

1. Log in to G-Invoicing, click on the Servicing Agency drop-down menu, and click on GT&C . A list of GT&Cs appears. 

2. In the GT&C# column, click the link for a GT&C with a status of Open for Orders . The GT&C will then open. 

3. Click on the Create Order button at the bottom of the page: 



 

- The Create Order default page will appear. As a default, the Create Order Page will open on the Partner 
Information section of the Order form. 

- Please note that while multiple ALCs may be been placed in a GT&C, an Order may only be created using one ALC. 
Also, depending on what information was used on the GT&C for the Servicing Agency, the Servicing Agency Group name 
and ALC may auto-populate on the Order. 

- You may click on the GT&C# highlighted in blue to display summary information for the GT&C. 

 




 

4. Complete the fields near the top of the Order form based on information provided in the table below: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Assisted 
Acquisitions 
Indicator 
(Required) 

Select Yes or No from the drop-down menu based on the IAA 
information entered into the GT&C. 

Period of 
Performance 
(PoP) Start 
Date 
(Required) 

Click on the empty PoP Start Date field. When the calendar box 
appears, select the appropriate date. You may use the arrows near the 
top of the calendar box to skip ahead to a future month, or to go back 
to a previous month. You may also click on the Month and Year dropdown 
menus to select specific a month or year. Alternatively, you may 
enter a date by hand in the open field at the top of the calendar box 
using this format: yyyy-mm-dd . If the month and the arrows are not 
visible to you on the calendar box, please lower the zoom level on your 
internet browser and/or computer screen. 

The Start POP date represents the first date the Servicing Agency fulfills 
the order and delivers the goods and/or services. The Performance 
Period may include activities associated with closing out the delivery of 
goods and/or services. 

Note: The date must be within the GT&C dates. 

PoP End 
Date 
(Required) 

Click on the empty PoP End Date field. When the calendar box 
appears, select the appropriate date. You may use the arrows near the 
top of the calendar box to skip ahead to a future month, or to go back 
to a previous month. You may also click on the Month and Year dropdown 
menus to select specific a month or year. Alternatively, you may 
enter a date by hand in the open field at the top of the calendar box 
using this format: yyyy-mm-dd . If the month and the arrows are not 
visible to you on the calendar box, please lower the zoom level on your 
internet browser and/or computer screen. 

The End POP date represents the last day the Servicing Agency fulfills 
the order and delivers the goods and/or services. The Performance 
Period may include activities associated with closing out the delivery of 
goods and/or services. 

Note: The date must be within the GT&C dates. 

 

 

5. Complete the fields in the Partner Information section of the Order based on information provided in the table 
below: 

 

Field 
Name 

Description 


Agency 
Account 

The Agency Account names will automatically be filled in based on the 
agencies named on the GT&C. 

Requesting 
Agency 
Group 
Name & 
Description 

Select a Group Name from the drop-down menu. (The Description for 
each Group will be separated by a dash after the Group Name.) 

If a Group does not appear for you and you believe it should, please 
contact your trading partner for assistance. 

Requesting 
Agency ALC 

You may select an ALC by clicking on the field and scrolling through the 
list of available ALCs, or you may search of an ALC by typing in an ALC 
number in the search field with the magnifying glass above the list of 
ALC numbers. 

Requesting 
Agency 
Cost Center 
(Optional) 

Requesting Agency Cost Center information will only be available to the 
Requesting Agency. 

Requesting 
Agency 
Business 
Unit 
(Optional) 

Requesting Agency Business Unit information will only be available to the 
Requesting Agency. 

Requesting 
Agency 
Department 
ID 
(Optional) 

Requesting Agency Department information will only be available to the 
Requesting Agency. 

Servicing 
Agency 
Group 
Name & 
Description 

Select a Group from the drop-down menu. (The Description for each 
Group will be separated by a dash after the Group Name.) 

Note : Only Group Names that have been assigned to the Servicing 
Order Manager or Creator roles in a user account will appear in the 
Group Name drop-down menu. If a Group does not appear for you and 
you believe it should, please contact one of your agency's User 
Administrators for assistance. 

Servicing 
Agency ALC 

You may select an ALC by clicking on the field and scrolling through the 
list of available ALCs, or you may search of an ALC by typing in an ALC 
number in the search field with the magnifying glass above the list of 
ALC numbers. 

Servicing 
Agency 
Cost Center 

Servicing Agency Cost Center information available in the drop-down list 
will depend on the Cost Center information entered in the GT&C. 

Servicing 
Agency 
Business 
Unit 

Servicing Agency Business Unit information available in the drop-down 
list will depend on the Business Unit information entered in the GT&C. 

Servicing 
Agency 
Department 
ID 
(Optional) 

Servicing Agency Department ID information available in the drop-down 
list will depend on the Department ID information entered in the GT&C. 

Order 
Tracking 
Number 

Enter an internal tracking number for your agency, if applicable. 
Maximum value: 50 characters. 

Unique 
Entity ID 

A distinct identifier which is used to identify a specific Government 
entity. Must be exactly 12 characters. 

Funding 
Office Code 

This field is only available to the Requesting Agency. 

Funding 
Agency 
Code 

This field is only available to the Requesting Agency. 

Comments 

Any additional comments associated with the Order. 1000 character 
maximum. 


 

 

6. Click on the Authority section on the left side of the page , and fill in the appropriate fields based on the information 
in provided in the table below: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Corresponding field 
on the IAA 7600 B 
form 

Program 
Authority 

 

 

Program Authority 
Title 

This is the title associated with the 
authority that grants the 
Requesting/Servicing Agency program 
authority. 

Enter a Servicing Program Authority 
Title, up to 100 characters. 

Block #20 

Program Authority 
Citation 

This is the citation associated with the 
authority that grants the Requesting 
Agency/Servicing program authority. 

Enter a Servicing Agency Program 
Authority Citation of up to 100 
characters. 

Block #21 

Statutory 
Authority 

 

 

Statutory 
Authority Fund 
Type Code 
(Required) 

Select the appropriate fund type: 

Franchise Fund 

Revolving Fund 

Working Capital Fund 

Economy Act 

Other Authority 

Block #17 

Statutory 
Authority Fund 
Type Title 
(Conditional) 

 

Enter the statutory authority title, up 
to 100 characters. 

This field is required if Economy Act is 
not the Statutory Authority Fund Type. 

Block #18 

Statutory 
Authority Fund 
Type Citation 
(Conditional) 

Enter the statutory authority citation, 
up to 100 characters. 

This field is required if Economy Act is 
not the Statutory Authority Fund Type. 

Block #19 

 

- For additional information regarding Statutory Authority, please see the available Excel spread sheet provided in the 
Interagency Agreement (IAA) section here . 

 

7. Click on the Advance section on the left side of the page, and fill in the appropriate fields based on information in 
the table below. 

 

- CRITICAL NOTE : The Advance section fields do not become editable unless the Advance Indicator is set to Yes on 
the Order Schedule. 

 

 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Advance Revenue 
Recognition Methodology 

This field is required if the user selected “Yes ” as the 
Advance Indicator on the Order Schedule. 


(Conditional) 

Identify the Revenue Recognition Methodology that both 
parties will use to account for the Requesting Agency’s 
expense and the Servicing Agency’s revenue as costs 
incurred by the Servicing Agency in providing the goods 
and services for this Order against ALL advances for this 
Order. 

Straight Line – Select if the same amount recognized 
each month. 

Accrual Per Work Completed – Select if accruing 
revenue/expense other than on a straight-line basis. 

Monthly – Select if basing the accrual on work 
completed and invoiced on a monthly basis. 

Other – Select if using another regular period w, such 
as bimonthly or quarterly. Describe the method in the 
Description If Method is “Other” text box. 

You should work closely with the Requesting Agency’s 
and Servicing Agency’s Finance staff to complete this 
information. 

Advance Revenue 
Recognition Description 
(Conditional) 

If the user selected “Other” in the Advance Revenue 
Recognition list, enter a description for the method, 
such as bimonthly, quarterly, etc. for posting accruals. 

Advance Payment 
Authority Title 
(Conditional) 

This field is required if one or more Advance fields or 
Amounts are entered in the Order. 

Enter the Requesting Agency’s specific authority that 
allows advances. 

Advance Payment 
Authority Citation 
(Conditional) 

This field is required if one or more Advance fields or 
Amounts are entered in the Order. 

Enter the Requesting Agency’s specific authority that 
allows advances. 

 

 

8. Click on the Delivery section on the left side of the page , and fill in the appropriate fields based on the information in 
provided in the table below: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

FOB Point (Required) 

The Freight On Board (FOB) Point identifies the Buyer 
and Seller agreed upon method for transfer of 
ownership. 

FOB largely determines which Performance reporting 
rules are applied for Order settlement, and ultimately 
which Performance reports will trigger Order settlement. 

Select one of the following options where the transfer of 
responsibility for the goods will occur: 

Source/Origin – Transfer of ownership and Settlement 
occurs when the Servicing Agency reports Performance; 
Source should be used when the Servicing Agency 
wishes to control settlement. 

Destination – Transfer of ownership occurs when a 
Requesting Agency reports Performance; Settlement is 
then triggered when a Buyer reports Performance or 
theConstructive Receipt Days haved passed/occurred, 
whichever happens first. Destination should be used 
when a Requesting Agency wishes to control settlement, 
and the Servicing Agency will be delivering goods or 
services to their final destination. 


Other –This is treated the same as FOB Destination. 
However, “Other” should only be used when a Servicing 
Agency is delivering goods or services to a location that 
is somewhere between origin and destination. 

CRITICAL NOTE : It is important to select the proper 
FOB Point as it will have a great impact on Performance . 

 

Constructive Receipt Days 
(Conditional) 

The CRD field is required to be filled in if the FOB Point 
has been selected as Destination . 

CRDs are the number of elapsed calendar days (from the 
Servicing Agency's delivered/performed action) after 
which received/accepted is assumed to occur by the 
Requesting Agency. The maximum amount of days that 
can be entered is 90. 

Note : This field can only be entered and/or modified by 
the Requesting Agency. 

Acceptance Point 

Select one of the following options where the acceptance 
of responsibility for the goods occurs: 

 

Source/Origin 

 

Destination 

Place of Acceptance 

Enter the location (physical address) at which the goods 
or services will be accepted by the Requesting Agency. 
(Maximum of 100 alphanumeric characters.) 

Inspection Point 

Select one of the following options where the inspection 
of the goods occurs: 

 

Source/Origin 

 

Destination 

Place of Inspection 

This is the location (physical address) at which the goods 
or services will be inspected by the Requesting Agency. 
(Maximum of 100 alphanumeric characters.) 

 

9. Click on the Billing section on the left side of the page , and fill in the appropriate fields based on the information in 
provided in the table below: 

Field Name 

Description 

Billing Frequency 

The frequency of an occurrence for an item (e.g. 
collection, bill, invoice.) Select from the following: 

Weekly 

Monthly 

Quarterly 

Other 

Billing Frequency 
Explanation (Conditional) 

Enter an explanation if the Billing Frequency was selected 
as "Other". (Maximum of 240 alphanumeric characters.) 

Priority Order Indicator 

Identifies whether the Order is a high priority. 

Select either Yes or No from the drop-down menu. 

Capital Planning and 
Investment Control 

Identifies whether the Information Technology (IT) goods 
or services have been screened to ensure compliance 
with CPIC requirements. This is an indicator that 


identifies if the goods will become a capital asset (if Yes 
is selected) or an expense (if No is selected). 

Select either Yes or No from the drop-down menu. 

 

If unknown at time of brokering, agencies may leave this 
field blank. 

 

This value may be changed by Administrative 
Modification , which will not require reapproval. 

 

10. Click on the Point of Contact section on the left side of the page , and fill in the appropriate fields based on the 
information in provided in the table below: 

Field Name 

Description 

Name (Required) 

Enter the full name of the Servicing Agency Point of 
Contact (POC). 

Email (Required) 

Enter an official email address for the Servicing Agency 
POC. 

Phone (Required) 

Enter a phone number for the Servicing Agency POC. 

Fax 

Enter a fax number for the Servicing Agency POC. 

 

Note: Servicing Agencies may enter in Point of Contact information for the Requesting Agency if they desire. 

 

 

11. Click on the Prepared By section on the left side of the page. The fields below should be automatically filled in for 
the Servicing Agency Preparer of the Order: 

Field Name 

Description 

Name 

The full name of the person creating the Order. 

Phone 

The business phone number of the person creating the 
Order. 

Email 

The official email address for the person creating the 
Order. 

 

 

Entering Line Items 

The Requesting Agency uses the Line Item Details Page to complete the line item information for the Order. 

How to Enter Line Item Details: 

1. Click on Line 1 in the menu on the left-hand side of the page . A Line Item Summary for the first line item of the 
Order will display, along with a Schedule Summary : 



 

 

- By clicking on the arrow to the left of the Line # field, you can toggle the Schedule Summary on or off. 

- By clicking on the arrow to the left of the Schedule # field, you can toggle the detailed Schedule information on or 


off. 

Please note that since you are creating a new Order, the Line Item and Schedule Summaries will display several blank 
fields at this time; the fields will automatically be filled in once you start to enter specific Order data. 

A Line Item Summary will display the following information: 

Field Name 

Description 

Line# 

Line number of the order, sequentially starting at 1 

Uploaded orders can use a different convention. 

Status 

The current status of the Line Item should be 
automatically filled in. 

Item Code 

The Product Service Code/Federal Supply Code for the 
item or service associated with the Order. 

Description 

A description of the goods or service. 

Units of Measure (UOM) 

Standard unit or system of units by which a quantity is 
accounted for and expressed 

Each UOM is either a goods or a service item. 

Product/Service Identifier 

This is the National Stock Number (NSN) or other 
pertinent information associated with the Shipment. 

Capitalized Asset 

Indicates whether or not this item is a capitalized asset 
or not by displaying True or False . 

Type of Service Required 

Severable - Services that are continuing and ongoing, 
such as help-desk support, janitorial services, for which 
the agency receives a benefit each time the service 
renders. 

Non Severable - Work that results in a final product and 
for which a benefit occurs only when the entire project is 
complete, such as systems design. 

Not Applicable 

Line Quantity 

The total number of units of the corresponding 
schedules. 

Total Line Costs 

The sum of the Line costs. 

Advance Amount 

The total amount of the advance for this Order line. 

Net Due Amount 

Net amount due for this line item once the order line is 
fully invoiced 

It is the difference between the Obligation and Advance 
Amount. 

 

2. Click on the notepad/pencil icon in the Line # field to enter or update the appropriate Line Item Summary fields 
based on the information in the table below: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Status 

The current status of the Line Item should be 
automatically filled in. 

Item Code (Required) 

Enter the Product Service Code/Federal Supply Code for 
the item or service associated with the Order. 

Description (Required) 

Enter a description of the goods or service. Maximum 
character limit: 240. 

Units of Measure (UOM) 

 

(Required) 

Standard unit or system of units by which a quantity is 
accounted for and expressed (i.e., DO = US Dollars, EA 
= Each) 

Each UOM is either a goods or a service item. As you 


enter in characters for the UOM, a drop-down menu will 
appear with several UOMs to choose from when 
applicable. 

A complete list of currently available UOMs is available 
here . 

UOM Description 
(Required) 

The basic description of the unit of measure being 
exchanged. This field will automatically be filled in once 
a UOM is selected. 

Product/Service Identifier 
(Optional) 

This is an optional field to capture additional identifier 
information and it may be agency specific. For example, 
DoD agencies may use the National Stock Number 
(NSN), or GSA customers may use a GSA item or 
service code. 

Capitalized Asset 
Indicator (Required) 

Specifies when the Servicing Agency considers the line 
item to be a capitalized asset. An item is capitalized 
when it is recorded as an asset, rather than an expense. 
This means that the expenditure will appear in the 
balance sheet, rather than the income statement. 
Agencies may have their own guidance for when items 
are capitalized. 

Select True or False from the drop-down menu. 

UID Required Indicator 

Specifies whether or not the item requires a unique item 
identifier (UID) marking. 

Please select either Y for Yes or N for No. 

Type of Service 
Requirements (Required) 

Select from the following: 

Severable - Services provided on an on-going, as 
needed, or recurring basis and that meet a need of the 
Government at the time they are delivered. When the 
need for a portion of recurring or continuing services 
arises in the fiscal year subsequent to the one in which 
the services were initially funded, that portion is 
severable and chargeable to appropriations available for 
obligation in the subsequent fiscal year. A service is 
severable if it can be separated into components that 
independently meet a need of the government. 
Examples include help-desk support, maintenance, or 
janitorial services, which are continuous and recurring in 
nature. 

Non Severable - Services which constitute a specific, 
entire job or single undertaking with a defined endproduct 
that cannot feasibly be subdivided for separate 
performance. Accordingly, non-severable services must 
be financed entirely out of the appropriation current at 
the time of award, even though performance may 
extend into future fiscal years. A service is nonseverable 
if the service produces a single or unified 
outcome, product, or report that cannot be subdivided 
for separate performance in difference fiscal years. 
Examples include system design, building conversion or 
environmental study. 

Not Applicable 

 

3. When you are finished completing all applicable fields, click Ok. (Clicking on Cancel returns you to the previous 
page.) 

How to Add Additional Line Items: 

To add additional Line Items to an Order: 


- If you are in the process of creating an Order, and would like to add additional Line Items to it: 

1. Click on the Add Line button located just below the list of existing Line Items in the Line Item Summary. 

A new line should then appear below the last Line Item created. 

- If you would like to add a Line Item to an Order that is in a Draft status: 

1. Click on the Orders drop-down menu. 

2. Click on the Order # of the Order you would like to perform work on. 

3. Click on one of the Lines displayed in the menu on the left-hand side of the page. 

4. Click on the Add Line button. 

A new line should then appear below the last Line Item created. 

 

Copying Line Items 

 

How to Copy a Line Item: 

 

1. Select an existing Line Item, and click on the “Double Page” icon in the Line # column: 

 



 

2. An exact copy of the Line Item will be added to the Order underneath the original Line Item. 

If you make a copy of a Line Item that is in itself a copy, then the new Line Item will appear under the previous copy. 

 

Deleting Line Items 

 

How to Delete Line Items: 

To delete line items during the draft phase of an Order creation: 

1. Click on the garbage can icon located in the Line # field of any given Line Item. The Remove Line box will appear. 

2. Click on Yes to delete the Line Item from the Order. (Clicking on No returns you to the Line.). Alternatively, you may 
click on the “X” in the top right-hand corner of the box to dismiss the Remove Line request. 

3. Once you click Yes, the line will be removed from the Order. 


Note : After a line is created, it may not be deleted once the Order has been saved or updated. Instead, it may be 
Cancelled . 

 

Cancelling and Restoring Line Items 

A Line that has been created may not be Deleted once the Order has been saved, however, it may be Cancelled . 
Please be aware that cancelling a Line does not remove the line from view. Once a line is cancelled, the status of the 
line changes to “C”, and several fields on the line will display “0”. If the cancelled Line has a Schedule associated with it, 
the status of the Schedule will display as “Cancelled”. Once a Line has been cancelled, the remaining information 
displayed on it and any associated Schedule will be ignored by the system. 

A Line that has been cancelled may be Restored to an Active status if needed (see below). 

 

How to Cancel Line Items: 

1. Click on the garbage can icon located in the Line # field of any given Line Item that you wish to Cancel. The Cancel 
Line box will appear. 

2. Click on Yes to cancel the Line Item. (Clicking on No will return you to the Line.) Alternatively, you may click on the 
“X” in the top right-hand corner of the box to dismiss the Cancel Line request. 

Once you click Yes, the Line will be cancelled. Please note that the Net Order and Total Order Amounts will not reflect 
the changes until you save or update the Order draft. 

 

How to Restore a Cancelled Line Item: 

Once a Line is cancelled, it may be Restored to an Active status. 

1. Click on the blue garbage can icon with the white arrow inside of it. The Restore Line box will appear. 

2. Click on Yes to restore the Line Item. (Clicking on No will return you to the Line.) Alternatively, you may click on the 
“X” in the top right-hand corner of the box to dismiss the Restore Line request. 

3. Once you click Yes, the Line will be restored, and all of the fields will display their previous values before the Line was 
cancelled. Please note that the Net Order and Total Order Amounts will not reflect the changes until you save or update 
the Order draft. 

 

Entering Schedules 

For each Line Item created, the Requesting Agency will use the Schedule Details page to complete the Schedule 
information for the Order. 

To display the Schedule Summary for each individual Line Item : 

 

1. Click on the arrow to the left of the Line # field in any Line Item to display the Schedule Summary. Alternatively, 
you may click on the Schedule link located in the menu on the left side of the page under any Line Item listed: 




 

A Schedule Summary will display information noted in the table below. Please note that several Schedule Summary 
fields will remain empty until information is added to the Schedule itself. 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Schedule # 

Selected order schedule number. 

Status 

Current status of the line item. 

Unit Cost 

The cost of each unit. 

Quantity 

The total number of units for this schedule. 

Amount 

The total amount of this schedule (Unit Cost x Quantity). 

Advance Pay Indicator 

Indicates whether or not this Order involves an Advance payment. 

 

 

How to Enter Schedule Details: 

 

1. From the Schedule Summary , click on the arrow to the left of the Schedule # field. The Schedule Details fields 
will display: 



 


 

2. Fill out the appropriate fields in each section of the Schedule based on information provided in the table below. 
Please note that once information is entered into certain Schedule fields, the information displayed in related Schedule 
Summary fields will automatically be updated. 

 

 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Schedule 

Unit Cost (Required) 

The cost of the unit. 

Quantity (Required) 

The total number of units for this schedule. 

Advance Pay Indicator 
(Conditional) 

 

This field is only required if Advance was noted on the GT&C. 
(If it was not, this field will default to a selection of No.) 

If Advance was noted on the GT&C, select Yes or No from the 
drop-down menu. 

Funding Information 

Treasury Account 
Symbol 

 

(See Description to the 
right for required 
values) 

Enter the Treasury Account Symbol (TAS) for the Requesting 
Agency by clicking on the magnifying glass icon on the right 
side of the field. You may select the proper TAS from the dropdown 
menu, or you may manually enter each TAS component 
in the appropriate boxes. 

The TAS is a grouping of three specific United States 
Department of the Treasury funding-related codes that identify 
specific United States Department of the Treasury accounts 
using receipt, appropriation, expenditure, and other fund 
account symbols and titles as assigned by the United States 
Department of the Treasury and the Office of Management and 
Budget. 

Required values : AID (3 digits), MAIN (4 digits), and SUB 
(3 digits) 

 

Servicing Agencies have the option of selecting a TAS for the 
Requesting Agency if desired. 

BETC (Required) 

Depending on the TAS selected, the available BETCs for the 
Servicing Agency are COLL , COLAVRCT , or COLUVRCT . 

The BETC is up to an eight-character code used in the Central 
Accounting Reporting System (CARS) to indicate the type of 
activity being reported (borrowing, repayment, offsetting 
collection, receipt, disbursement, etc.). This code must 
accompany the TAS and the dollar amounts to classify the 
transaction against the fund balance with the United States 
Department of the Treasury. 

Servicing Agencies will need to select a BETC for the 
Requesting Agency if a TAS has been selected for the 
Requesting Agency. Depending on the TAS selected, the BETCs 
available for the Requesting Agency are DISGF and DISNGF . 

 

For more information on the General Fund disbursement 
BETCs, please contact the General Fund group at 
GeneralFund@fiscal.treasury.gov 

 

Object Class Code 

Select an object class code from the drop-down menu. 

The Federal Government uses an Object Class Code to record 
its financial transactions according to the nature of the services 
provided or received when obligations first incur. 

Additional Accounting 
Classification 

Add any additional accounting information required for agency 
internal tracking purposes, if needed (320 alphanumeric 
characters maximum). 


Bona Fide Need 

This field is only available to the Requesting Agency. 

SLOA (see below) 

 

Use the Standard Line of Accounting (SLOA) fields to enter or edit identification codes used by the Requesting Agency or 
the Servicing Agency. The SLOA’s variable length and alphanumeric codes provide a uniform system of reference 
information to the agency’s original obligating document and verify that billings are properly charged. Shown on all 
purchase requests, resulting obligation and expenditure documents, SLOA codes convey key accounting information, 
such as the department within the agency using the funds, the specific appropriation charged for the purchase of 
goods/services, the organization responsible for accounting and reporting of the obligation and payment, and the 
payment type for the specific transaction. 

 

 The SLOA fields include fiscal year dates, accounting codes, and agency disbursing identification. SLOA information 
allows G-Invoicing to pass two lines of accounting data to IPAC: one line for the Requesting Agency, and one line for the 
Servicing Agency. 

 

Note : SLOA fields are formatted for use by the Department of Defense (DoD) and follow Standard Financial Information 
Structure (SFIS); however, they may be used optionally by other trading partners to record additional information such 
as internal accounting strings. 

 

How To Enter SLOA Information : 

 

3. Fill in the appropriate fields in the SLOA section based on the information provided in the table below: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Source Reference 

Accounting 
Classification 
Reference 
Number 

Enter the Requesting Agency 
Accounting Classification Reference 
Number (ACRN). 

Maximum length is 2 alphanumeric 
characters. 

The ACRN comprises first of ten 
elements in a line of accounting. The 
two-digit ACRN identifies each separate 
line of accounting classification data on 
a document citing fund usage to 
ensure that the expenditure properly 
matches the corresponding obligation. 
Assign an ACRN to each line of 
accounting classification data starting 
with “AA.” When there is only one line 
of accounting classification data, the 
ACRN is “AA.” Assign alphanumeric 
ACRNs when alpha codes are 
exhausted. The alpha characters “I” 
and “O” are not used because these 
characters can be confused with ‘0” 
and “1”. Duplication of ACRNs does not 
occur within the same funding 
document. 

 

Reimbursable 
Flag 

The Reimbursable Indicator is a single 
alphabetical code used to flag those 
expenditures incurred for a designated 
TAFS account that are considered 
reimbursable to the account. 

A9 in the Standard Financial 
Information Structure (SFIS) 
; Examples: Direct, (D) or 
Reimbursable (R) Code, 

Federal Award 
Identification 
Number 

The Federal Award Identification 
Number (FAIN) is a unique number 
assigned to a financial assistance 
award by the awarding agency. This 
number will identify the award in 
several systems including: ASAP.gov, 
USASpending.gov, and Grants.gov. 
This number along with the CFDS will 
allow for more precise tracking of grant 
obligations and payments. Maximum 
length is 30 characters. 

 

Unique Record 

An agency defined identifier that (when 

 


Identifier 

provided) is unique for every reported 
action. Maximum length is 70 
characters. 

Activity Address 
Code 

The Activity Address Code (AAC) used 
for shipping location. Maximum length 
is 6 characters. 

 

Budget Line 
Item 

Enter a 16-character alphanumeric 
code that further sub-divides the 
Treasury Account Fund Symbol 
appropriation, below the Budget Sub 
Activity Line. 

For military personnel, value is Budget 
Sub-Activity (BSA) plus Budget Line 
Item (BLI). 

B4 in SFIS; Further 
subdivides the Treasury 
Account Fund Symbol below 
sub-activity 

e.g., 111 

Budget Fiscal 
Year 

Enter a 4-digit year. The budget or 
financial year, as opposed to a 
calendar year. The U.S. Government's 
fiscal year runs from October 1 of the 
prior year through September 30 of 
the next year. For example, FY 2015 
was from October 2014 through 
September 2015. 

e.g., 2018 

Security 
Cooperation 

(formerly 
Foreign Military 
Sales (FMS) 
Customer 
Code) 

The Security Cooperation Customer 
represents the country receiving the 
product and/or service in the FMS 
transaction. Maximum length is 3 
characters. 

T21 in SFIS; Security 
Cooperation (SC) Customer 

 

Security 
Cooperation 
Implementation 
Agency 

A single character alphabetical code 
which identifies the US Military 
Department or Agency which has 
negotiated or facilitated a foreign 
military sales case on behalf of the US 
Government. The majority of FMS 
cases are implemented by the Army 
(IA Code B), Navy (IA Code P) or Air 
Force (IA Code D) 

T27 in SFIS; Identifies the 
U.S. military department or 
agency that is executing the 
sale on behalf of the U.S. 
Government 

e.g., B=Army, D=Air Force, 
P=Navy 

Security 
Cooperation 
Case 
Designator 

Enter a 3 or 4 character alphanumeric 
code. A Security Cooperation Case 
Designator is used to reflect a FMS 
contractural sales agreement (Letter of 
Offer and Acceptance) between the US 
and an eligible foreign country 

T22 in SFIS; 

e.g., UAK 

Security 
Cooperation 
Case Line Item 
Identifier 

The Security Cooperation Case Line 
Item Identifier is used to identify a 
detailed line item requirement 
contained within the (Letter of Offer 
and Acceptance). 

 

Sub-Allocation 

Identifies an organization to which 
funds have been Sub-Allocated. 
Maximum length is 4 characters. 

Use of this data element is exclusive to 
sub-allocation purposes, useful for 
Financial Reporting. 

e.g.,2054 

Accounting 
Identifier 

The Agency Accounting Identifier Code 
identifies the accounting system 
responsible for recording the 
accounting event. The Agency 
Accounting Identifier Code is intended 
to be an accounting system identifier, 
and therefore must be assigned to only 
one accounting system. Maximum 

O3 in SFIS; Fiscal Station 
Number; Comptroller 
defined, e.g., 021001 


length is 6 characters. 

Funding Center 
Identifier 

Enter a 16-character alphanumeric 
code. A Funding Center is a clearly 
defined responsibility area within an 
organizational unit to which budget 
authority is assigned 

Cost Object/Cost Accounting 
(CA) section in SFIS, e.g., Air 
Force = OAC, OBAN 

Cost Center 
Identifier 

Enter a 16-character alphanumeric 
code. A Cost Center is a clearly defined 
responsibility area where costs are 
incurred. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Navy = BCN 

Project 
Identifier 

Enter a 25-character code. A planned 
undertaking of work to be performed 
or product to be produced having a 
finite beginning and end. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Army = WBS 

Activity 
Identifier 

Enter a 16-character code. An Activity 
is a series of events, tasks, or units of 
work that are linked to perform a 
specific objective. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Army = Activity/Network 

Disburser 
Identifier 

Enter a 8-digit number. The Agency 
Disbursing Identifier is assigned to 
each disbursing office by the United 
States Department of the Treasury. It 
is an identification number that 
indicates authority to receive and 
disburse public funds and issue checks 
on the United States Department of 
the Treasury. 

 

Cost Element 
Code 

Enter a 15-character alphanumeric 
code. A Cost Element is a classification 
of an organization's revenues, 
expenses or consumable 
resources. Cost Element Code only 
relates to primary cost. Cost Element 
Code does not relate to secondary cost 
which is identified as agency specific 
and not enterprise-level. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Army = Commitment Item 

Work Order 
Number 

Enter a 16-character alphanumeric 
code that identifies an individual unit 
of work, batch, or lot of a distinct 
product or service. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Army = Internal Order, Air 
Force = Job Order 

Functional Area 

Enter a 16-character alphanumeric 
code. A Functional Area is a logical 
division of a Component's business 
operations. It represents the 
Functions the Component performs. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Army = Functional Area, Air 
Force = Budget/Project 

Parent Award 
Identifier 
(PAID) 

The identifier of the procurement 
award under which the specific award 
is issued (such as a Federal Supply 
Schedule). Term currently applies to 
procurement actions only. Maximum 
length is 50 characters. 

 

Procurement 
Instrument 
Identifier (PIID) 

The unique identifier for each contract, 
agreement or order. Maximum length 
is 50 characters. 

 

 

 

4. Fill in the appropriate Shipping Information fields based on the information provided in the table below: 

 

Shipping Information 

Address Identifier 

A code that identifies the end point of the shipment or the 
location the service is being performed. 

Agency Title 

The name of the agency at the ship to location. 


Address 1 (Conditional) 

1st address line associated with shipment. This information 
must be entered if any other shipping information has been 
provided. 

Address 2 

2nd address line associated with shipment 

Address 3 

3rd address line associated with shipment 

City (Conditional) 

This information must be entered if any other shipping 
information has been provided. The name of the city of the 
ship to location. 

Postal Code 
(Conditional) 

This information must be entered if the destination country for 
the Order is the US. 

The 5-digit (ZIP) code that geographically identifies individual 
Post Offices or metropolitan area delivery stations associated 
with every mailing address. 

State (Conditional) 

The name of the state of the ship to location. 

This information must be entered if the destination country for 
the Order is the US. 

Country (Conditional) 

The name of the country of the ship to location. 

This information must be entered if any other shipping 
information has been provided. 

Location Description 

The description of the ship to location (i.e.: military base, 
airport, etc.) 

Special Shipping 
Information 

Optional text field to include additional Shipping Information for 
the Delivery of Products. Enter specific information for 
shipping, shipping company, date/time, special instructions, 
etc. 

Delivery POC Name 

The name of the Point of Contact the shipment is being 
delivered to. 

Delivery POC Title 

Optional text field for the title of the Point of Contact the 
shipment is being delivered to. 

Delivery POC Email 

Enter the email address for the Point of Contact the shipment is 
being delivered to. 

Deliver POC Phone 

Enter the phone number for the Point of Contact the shipment 
is being delivered to. 

Additional Info 

Enter any additional information not covered in other areas 

 

How to Add Additional Schedules to Line Items: 

 

To add additional Schedules to an Order: 

- If you are in the process of creating an Order, and would like to add additional Schedules to it before saving the Order 
as a Draft: 

1. Click on the Add Schedule button located just below the list of existing Schedules under the Schedule Summary . 
(Note : If you have the list of Schedule Details already expanded, you may scroll all the way to the bottom of the details 
list and click on the Add Schedule button). 

A new line should then appear below the last Schedule created. 

- If you would like to add a Schedule to an Order that is in a Draft status: 

1. From the Requesting Agency drop-down menu, click on Orders . 

2. Click on the Order # of the Order you would like to perform work on. 


3. Click on one of the Lines displayed in the menu on the left-hand side of the page. 

4. Click on the Add Schedule button. 

A new line should then appear below the last Schedule created. 

 

Copying Schedules 

You may make an exact copy of an existing Schedule and add it to the Order. 

How to Copy a Schedule: 

 

1. Select an existing Schedule, and click on the “Double Page” icon in the Schedule # column: 



2. An exact copy of the Schedule will be added to the Order underneath the original Schedule. 

If you make a copy of a Schedule that is in itself a copy, then the new Schedule will appear under the previous copy. 

 

Deleting Schedules 

 

How to Delete Schedules: 

 

To delete Schedules during the Draft phase of an Order creation: 

1. Click on the garbage can icon located in the Schedule # field of any given Schedule. The Remove Schedule box 
will appear. 

2. Click on either Yes or No to delete the Schedule from the Line Item. Alternatively, you may click on the “X” in the 
top right-hand corner of the box to dismiss the Remove Schedule request. 

Note : After a schedule is created, it may not be deleted once the Order has been saved or updated. Instead, it may be 
Cancelled (see below). 

 

Cancelling and Restoring Schedules 

A Schedule that has been created may not be Deleted once the Order has been saved; however, it may be Cancelled . 


Please be aware that cancelling a Schedule does not remove the line from view. Once a Schedule is cancelled, the 
status of the Schedule changes to “Cancelled”. Please be aware that if a Line that has a Schedule associated with it is 
cancelled, the status of the associated Schedule will automatically change to “Cancelled”. Once a Schedule has been 
cancelled, the remaining information displayed on it will be ignored by the system. 

Note : A Line must have at least one active schedule on it. If you attempt to Cancel the only Schedule associated to a 
Line, an error message will display. 

A Schedule that has been cancelled may be Restored to an Active status if needed (see below). 

How to Cancel Schedules: 

1. Click on the garbage can icon located in the Schedule # field of any given Schedule that you wish to Cancel. The 
Cancel Schedule box will appear. 

2. Click on Yes to cancel the Schedule. (Clicking on No will return you to the Schedule.) Alternatively, you may click on 
the “X” in the top right-hand corner of the box to dismiss the Cancel Schedule request. 

Once you click Yes, the Schedule will be cancelled. 

 

 

How to Restore a Cancelled Schedule: 

Once a Schedule is cancelled, it may be Restored to an Active status. 

1. Click on the garbage can icon with the white arrow inside of it. The Restore Schedule box will appear. 

2. Click on Yes to restore the Schedule. (Clicking on No will return you to the Schedule.) Alternatively, you may click on 
the “X” in the top right-hand corner of the box to dismiss the Restore Schedule request. 

Once you click Yes, the Schedule will be restored. 

Once An Order Has Been Completed: 

 

Once an Order has been completed by the Servicing Agency, it may be sent for Approval . 

 


Saving an Order 

An agency user may save an Order as a Draft at any time during the process of creating an Order. Saving an Order as 
a Draft allows a Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency user to return to the Order at any time to update and/or 
complete the Order. 

CRITICAL NOTE : Orders do not self-save. If you happen move out of the Orders sub-menu without saving an Order 
first, any information you have entered into the Order up until that point will not be retained, and you will need to start 
over. 

Agencies may save an Order that has been shared with them by their trading partner and is in a Shared with 
Requesting or Shared with Servicing status . Doing so allows an agency user the ability to update an Order without 
advancing it for Approval. 

Note : Once an Order is saved as a Draft , users will only be able to delete it from G-Invoicing if it meets certain criteria. 
For further information on deleting Orders, please see here . Any unwanted Orders that have progressed beyond the 
Draft stage and cannot be deleted may be Rejected or Closed by users with the proper permissions. For additional 
information on User Roles and Permissions for Orders, please speak to a G-Invoicing User Administrator from your 
agency. 

Please keep in mind that when an Order is in a Draft status, it will only be visible to the Requesting Agency or Servicing 
Agency that is creating the Order. An Order will only be visible/accessible to the trading partner once it has been shared 
with them by the agency that created it. 

 

How to Save an Order as a Draft: 

Note : Users who hold roles within G-Invoicing that allow them to create Orders will also have at least one Group 
assigned to each of those roles within their G-Invoicing user account. You will need to select the appropriate Group 
before you will be able to save the Order. For additional information on Groups, please speak to a G-Invoicing User 
Administrator or Organization Administrator from your agency. 

- To save an Order as a Draft at any point during the Create Order process: 

1. Click on the Save As Draft button that appears at the bottom of any Create Order page. 



2. A “Success: Draft Saved ” message will appear, and an Order number will display at the top of the Order. The Order 
will also move to a Draft status. 


 

- To save an Order that is already in a Draft status: 

1. Click on the Update Draft button that appears at the bottom of any Order page. 



2. A “Success: Draft Updated ” message will display, and the Order will remain in a Draft status. 

 

 

How to Save an Order after it has been Shared with your agency by the agency that created it: 

 

An agency user may save the information they have entered into an Order that is in a Shared with Requesting or 
Shared with Servicing status if they should need to complete their work on it at a later time. Please note that before 
you attempt to Save an Order that is in a Shared status, you may need to fill in some required fields (i.e., Point of 
Contact information). 

To save an Order that is in a Shared with Requesting or Shared with Servicing status: 

1. Click on the Update button at the bottom of each Order page. 

2. A “Success Updated ” message will appear at the top of the Order. The Order will remain in a Shared with 
Requesting or Shared with Servicing status. 


Working with Attachments to an Order 

Only Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency users with the Manager, Approver, or Creator roles assigned to them are 
able to add attachments to an Order. Please be aware of following rules when working with Order attachments: 

 

- File name must be no more than 132 characters 

 

- The only allowable characters in attachment file names are: lower case letters (a-z), upper case letters (A-Z), 
numbers 0 through 9, dashes, and underscores (i.e., a file named ORDERS2018&2019_mipr$ is not acceptable, but a 
file named ORDERS 2018_2019_mipr is) 

 

- The maximum number of attachments allowed per Order is 25 

 

- The upload file size limit for all allowable file types is 10MB 

 

- The maximum size of all attachments combined per document is 250MB 

 

- Either Requesting Agency or Servicing Managers, Approvers, or Creators can add attachments to an Order in the 
following states: Draft, Pending Requesting Approval, Shared with Servicing, Pending Servicing Approval, and 
Open . 

 

- File types of .zip, .rar, .cmd, .exe, .bat, and .scr are not allowed as attachments at this time 

 

- Requesting Agencies can view Seller attachments, but they cannot delete them 

 

- Servicing Agencies can view Buyer attachments, but they cannot delete them 

 

- An Order draft must be saved at least one time before an attachment may be added to it 

 

The following file extensions/types are accepted by G-Invoicing: 

 

 

.doc 

word 

.docx 

word 

.xls 

excel 

.xlsx 

excel 

.xlsb 

excel 

.ppt 

powerpoint 

.pptx 

powerpoint 

.ppsx 

powerpoint 

.pps 

powerpoint 

.txt 

text 

.csv 

text 

.msg 

email 

.eml 

email 

.jpg 

image 

.gif 

image 

.png 

image 

.bmp 

image 

.pdf 

image 

.accdb 

ms database 


.mdb 

ms database 

 

 

 

 

How to Add Attachments to Orders: 

 

1. From either the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menu, click on Orders . 

2. Click on an Order# . 

3. Click on the Options box on the right side of the Order page. 

4. Click Attachments to open the Attachments box. The Attachments box will appear: 



 

5. Click on the Add Attachment button. The Upload Attachment box will appear: 



 

6. Click on the Browse button. 

7. Select a file from your machine or local network, then click on the Open button. Your file and its size will appear 
directly above the Nickname field: 

 



 

8. Enter in a nickname for the attachment in the Nickname field (optional). 


9. Click on the Upload button. (Clicking on the Cancel button will remove the file you selected and returns you to the 
Browse function of the Upload Attachment box. Alternatively, you may also click on the small “X” to the right of the file 
name to cancel the upload and/or remove the file.) 

10. A Success: Attachment Added message will appear. To close the Attachments box, click on the “X” in the top 
right corner of the box. 

 

 

How to View Attachments to Orders: 

 

1. From either the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, select an Order from the Order 
Summary Page that you would like to add an attachment to, and open it by clicking on the Order#. 

2. Locate an Order from the Order Summary List and click on the Order# to open it. 

3. From any Order section, click on the Options box near the top right corner of the page. 

4. Click on Attachments . The Attachments box will appear. 

5. Locate the file you wish to view, and click on its File Name . 

6. Click on Open to view the file, Save to store the file on your machine or network , or Cancel to return to the list of 
Attachments. (Note : This may differ slightly depending on the internet browser being used.) 

 

 

How to Delete Attachments from Orders: 

 

Attachments may only be deleted by the agency that uploaded them. 

 

1. From either the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, select an Order from the GT&C 
Summary Page that you would like to add an attachment to, and open it by clicking on the Order#. 

2. Locate an Order from the Order Summary List and click on the Order# to open it. 

3. Click on Attachments . 

4. Locate the file you wish to view, and click on the garbage can icon for it in the Delete column. 

5. Click on Yes to delete the attachment. (Clicking on No returns you to the list of Attachments.) 

6. A Success: Attachment Deleted message will appear. 


Submitting an Order for Approval 

The Requesting Agency and Servicing Agency are both required to submit Orders for Approval. Once an agency has 
finished creating an Order and approves it, the Order then becomes available for the trading partner to approve it. 

Please note that only users who hold either the Requesting Agency Order Manager or Servicing Agency Order Manager 
Roles may submit an Order for Approval. In addition, please ensure that all required fields are filled in before attempting 
to submit an Order For Approval. 

 

 

How to submit an Order for Approval as the agency who created it: 

 

1. Locate an Order from the Requesting Agency Orders Summary Page or Servicing Agency Orders Summary 
Page , and click on the Order #. 

2. Click on the Submit For Requesting Approval or Submit For Servicing Approval button at the bottom of any 
Order screen. 

- If the Order passes the data validation stage, a message stating “Success – Order submitted for (Requesting or 
Servicing) Agency Approval ” will display, and notifications will be sent to the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency 
Approvers if they have subscribed to them. 

- If the Order does not pass the data validation stage, a message stating “Data Validation Failed. Please Correct 
Invalid Data ” will appear at the top of the Order. If you look on the left side of the Order page, a red oval will display 
to the right of one or more section names. The number in the middle of the red oval will denote the number of errors 
that need to be corrected within that section before the Order can be submitted for approval. 

For each section that displays a red oval, click on the section name to view the specific data/fields that need to be 
addressed. The items that need to be corrected will be underlined in red, along with a brief description of the error 
provided just below the data/field itself. 

In the example below, there was one error noted in the Authority section of the Order. Clicking on Authority in the 
menu on the left revealed that the Statutory Authority Fund Type Code field was left empty, with the text “Required ” 
displayed beneath it. 



 


Filling out the field by selecting one of the choices provided in the drop-down menu will remove the red oval from the 
section menu. You may also remove the error message at the top of the Order by clicking on the red “X” in the far right 
side of the error message box. 

When all of the errors have been cleared, click on the either the Submit For Requesting Approval or Submit For 
Servicing Approval button to forward the Order on for approvals. If the Order passes data validation, the Order status 
will change to Pending Requesting Approval or Pending Servicing Approval, and notifications will be sent to the 
appropriate Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency Approvers if they have subscribed to them. 

 

How to Submit an Order for Approval as the Servicing Agency once it has been Shared with you by the 
Requesting Agency: 

 

1. Log in to G-Invoicing. 

2. From the Servicing Agency drop-down menu, click on Orders . The Order Summary Page appears. 

3. Search for an Order in a Shared with Servicing status, then click on the Order# to view it. 

4. The Order opens with the Partner Information section displaying by default. Complete the Partner Information 
section of the Order based on information provided in the table below: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Group Name 

Group information available in the drop-down menu will depend 
on the Organizational Groups a user has access to. 

Servicing Agency 
Cost Center 
(Optional) 

Servicing Agency Cost Center information available in the dropdown 
menu will depend on the Cost Center information entered 
in the GT&C. 

Servicing Agency 
Business Unit 
(Optional) 

Servicing Agency Business Unit information available in the 
drop-down menu will depend on the Business Unit information 
entered in the GT&C. 

Servicing Agency 
Department ID 
(Optional) 

Servicing Agency Department ID information available in the 
drop-down menu will depend on the Department ID information 
entered in the GT&C. 

Order Tracking 
Number 

Enter an internal tracking number for your agency, if applicable. 
Maximum value: 50 characters. 

Unique Entity ID 

A distinct identifier which is used to identify a specific 
commercial, nonprofit, or Government entity. 12 characters. 

Comments 

Any additional comments associated with the Order. 1000 
character maximum. 

 

5. Click on the Authority section on the left side of the page , and fill in the appropriate fields based on the information 
provided in the table below: 

Field Name 

Description 

Corresponding field 
on the IAA 7600B 
form 

Program 
Authority 

 

 

Program Authority 
Title 

Enter the Servicing Agency program 
authority title, up to 100 characters. 

N/A 

Program Authority 
Citation 
(Conditional) 

If you entered a Program Authority 
Title, enter the Program Authority 
Citation up to 100 characters. 

N/A 

Statutory 
Authority 

 

 


Statutory 
Authority 
Fund Type Code 
(Required) 

Select the appropriate fund type: 

Franchise Fund 

Revolving Fund 

Working Capital Fund 

Economy Act 

Other Authority 

Block #18 

Statutory 
Authority Fund 
Type Title 
(Conditional) 

 

This field is required if Economy Act is 
not the Statutory Authority Fund Type. 

Enter the Servicing Agency statutory 
authority title, up to 100 characters. 

Block #19 

Statutory 
Authority Fund 
Type Citation 
(Conditional) 

This field is required if Economy Act is 
not the Statutory Authority Fund Type. 

Enter the Servicing Agency statutory 
authority citation, up to 100 
characters. 

Block #20 

 

6. Click on the Advance section on the left side of the page, and fill in the appropriate fields based on information in 
the table below: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Advance Revenue 
Recognition Methodology 
(Conditional) 

This field is required if the agency selected “Yes ” for 
Advance Payment on the GT&C agreement. 

Identify the Revenue Recognition Methodology that both 
parties will use to account for the Requesting Agency’s 
expense and the Servicing Agency’s revenue as costs 
incurred by the Servicing Agency in providing the goods 
and services for this Order against ALL advances for this 
Order. 

Straight Line – Select if the same amount recognized 
each month. 

Accrual Per Work Completed – Select if accruing 
revenue/expense other than on a straight-line basis. 

Monthly – Select if basing the accrual on work 
completed and invoiced on a monthly basis. 

Other – Select if using another regular period w, such 
as bimonthly or quarterly. Describe the method in the 
Description If Method is “Other” text box. 

You should work closely with the Requesting Agency’s 
and Servicing Agency’s Finance staff to complete this 
information. 

Advance Revenue 
Recognition Description 
(Conditional) 

If the Servicing Agency selected “Other” in the Advance 
Revenue Recognition list, enter a description for the 
method, such as bimonthly, quarterly, etc. for posting 
accruals. 

Advance Payment 
Authority Title 
(Conditional) 

This field is required if one or more Advance fields or 
Amounts are entered in the Order. 

Enter the Servicing Agency’s specific authority that 
allows advances. 


Advance Payment 
Authority Citation 
(Conditional) 

This field is required if one or more Advance fields or 
Amounts are entered in the Order. 

Enter the Servicing Agency’s specific authority that 
allows advances. 

 

7. Click on the Billing section on the left side of the page, and fill in the appropriate fields based on the information in 
the table below: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Billing Frequency 
(Required) 

Select the billing frequency: 

Weekly 

Monthly 

Quarterly 

Other 

Billing Frequency 
Explanation (Conditional) 

This field is required if the 
Billing Frequency was 
chosen as “Other”. 

If the Servicing Agency selected “Other” in the Billing 
Frequency box, enter a description for the frequency. 

 

8. Click on the Point of Contact section on the left side of the page , and fill in the appropriate fields based on the 
information provided in the table below: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Name (Required) 

Enter the full name of the Servicing Agency Point of 
Contact (POC). 

Email (Required) 

Enter an official email address for the Servicing Agency 
POC. 

Phone (Required) 

Enter a phone number for the Servicing Agency POC. 

Fax 

Enter a fax number for the Servicing Agency POC. 

 

9. Skip the Prepared By section. The Preparer information will automatically be filled in once the Servicing Agency 
sends the Order for Approval. 

 

10. Click on a Line from the list on the left side of the page. 

 

11. Click on the notepad/pencil icon in the Line # field to enter or update the appropriate Line Item Summary fields 
based on the information in the table below: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Capitalized Asset Indicator 
(Required) 

Indicates whether or not this item is a capitalized asset. 

Select True or False from the drop-down menu, then 
click Ok. 

 

 

 12. From the menu on the left-hand side of the page, click on the Schedule for each Line number on the Order, and 
fill in the appropriate fields based on information in the table below: 

Field Name 

Description 

Funding Information 

 

Treasury Account 
Symbol 

Enter the Treasury Account Symbol (TAS) for the Servicing 
Agency by clicking on the magnifying glass icon on the right 


(See Description on the 
right for required 
values.) 

 

side of the field. You may select the proper TAS from the dropdown 
menu, or you may manually enter each TAS component 
in the appropriate boxes. Please note that only TAS values 
related to COLL BETCs will be displayed in the drop-down 
menu or will be accepted by the system if entered manually. 

The TAS is a grouping of eight specific United States 
Department of the Treasury funding-related codes that identify 
specific United States Department of the Treasury accounts 
using receipt, appropriation, expenditure, and other fund 
account symbols and titles as assigned by the United States 
Department of the Treasury and the Office of Management and 
Budget. 

Required values : AID (3 digits), MAIN (4 digits), and SUB 
(3 digits) 

BETC (Required) 

 

Select a BETC (Business Event Type Code) for the Servicing 
Agency if one has not already auto-populated in the field after a 
TAS has been selected. Please be aware that depending on 
what TAS is selected, only one BETC may be available to use. 

Collection is limited to Credit BETC. 

Payment is limited to Debit BETC. 

The BETC is an eight-character code used in the Central 
Accounting Reporting System (CARS) to indicate the type of 
activity being reported (borrowing, repayment, offsetting 
collection, receipt, disbursement, etc.). This code must 
accompany the TAS and the dollar amounts to classify the 
transaction against the fund balance with United States 
Department of the Treasury. 

Object Class Code 

Select an object class code from the list and click add to move 
it to the list box to the right. 

The Federal Government uses an Object Class Code to record 
its financial transactions according to the nature of the services 
provided or received when obligations first incur. 

Additional Accounting 
Classification 

Add any additional accounting information required for agency 
internal tracking purposes, if needed (320 alphanumeric 
characters maximum). 

Bona Fide Need 
(Required) 

Please enter sufficient information to describe and support the 
transaction (150 alphanumeric characters maximum). 

SLOA (see below) 

 

 

Use the Standard Line of Accounting (SLOA) fields to enter or edit identification codes used by the Requesting Agency or 
the Servicing Agency. The SLOA’s variable length and alphanumeric codes provide a uniform system of reference 
information to the agency’s original obligating document and verify that billings are properly charged. Shown on all 
purchase requests, resulting obligation and expenditure documents, SLOA codes convey key accounting information, 
such as the department within the agency using the funds; the specific appropriation charged for the purchase of 
goods/services; the organization responsible for accounting and reporting of the obligation and payment; and the 
payment type for the specific transaction. 

The SLOA fields include fiscal year dates, accounting codes, and agency disbursing identification. 

 

To enter SLOA information as the Servicing Agency: 

 

13. Fill in the appropriate fields in the SLOA section based on the information provided in the table below: 

 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Source Reference 

Accounting 
Classification 
Reference 
Number 

Enter the Servicing Agency Accounting 
Classification Reference Number 
(ACRN). 

Maximum length is 2 alphanumeric 
characters. 

 


The ACRN comprises first of ten 
elements in a line of accounting. The 
two-digit ACRN identifies each separate 
line of accounting classification data on 
a document citing fund usage to 
ensure that the expenditure properly 
matches the corresponding obligation. 
Assign an ACRN to each line of 
accounting classification data starting 
with “AA.” When there is only one line 
of accounting classification data, the 
ACRN is “AA.” Assign alphanumeric 
ACRNs when alpha codes are 
exhausted. The alpha characters “I” 
and “O” are not used because these 
characters can be confused with ‘0” 
and “1”. Duplication of ACRNs does not 
occur within the same funding 
document. 

Reimbursable 
Flag 

The Reimbursable Indicator is a single 
alphabetical code used to flag those 
expenditures incurred for a designated 
TAFS account that are considered 
reimbursable to the account. 

A9 in SFIS; Examples: 
Direct, (D) or Reimbursable 
(R) Code, 

Federal Award 
Identification 
Number 

The Federal Award Identification 
Number (FAIN) is a unique number 
assigned to a financial assistance 
award by the awarding agency. This 
number will identify the award in 
several systems including: ASAP.gov, 
USASpending.gov, and Grants.gov. 
This number along with the CFDS will 
allow for more precise tracking of grant 
obligations and payments. Maximum 
length is 30 characters. 

 

Unique Record 
Identifier 

An agency defined identifier that (when 
provided) is unique for every reported 
action. Maximum length is 70 
characters. 

 

Activity Address 
Code 
(Conditional) 

This field is required if the Business 
Partner Network (BPN) field within the 
Partner Information section of the 
Schedule is left empty. 

The Activity Address Code (AAC) used 
for shipping location. Maximum length 
is 6 characters. 

 

Budget Line 
Item 

Enter a 16-character alphanumeric 
code that further sub-divides the 
Treasury Account Fund Symbol 
appropriation, below the Budget Sub 
Activity Line. 

For military personnel, value is Budget 
Sub-Activity (BSA) plus Budget Line 
Item (BLI). 

B4 in SFIS; Further 
subdivides the Treasury 
Account Fund Symbol below 
sub-activity 

e.g., 111 

Budget Fiscal 
Year 

Enter a 4-digit year. The budget or 
financial year, as opposed to a 
calendar year. The U.S. Government's 
fiscal year runs from October 1 of the 
prior year through September 30 of 
the next year. For example, FY 2015 
was from October 2014 through 
September 2015. 

e.g., 2018 

Security 
Cooperation 

The Security Cooperation Customer 
represents the country receiving the 

T21 in SFIS; Security 
Cooperation (SC) Customer 


(formerly 
Foreign Military 
Sales/FMS 
Customer 
Code) 

product and/or service in the FMS 
transaction. Maximum length is 3 
characters. 

 

Security 
Cooperation 
Implementation 
Agency 

A single character alphabetical code 
which identifies the US Military 
Department or Agency which has 
negotiated or facilitated a foreign 
military sales case on behalf of the US 
Government. The majority of FMS 
cases are implemented by the Army 
(IA Code B), Navy (IA Code P) or Air 
Force (IA Code D) 

T27 in SFIS; Identifies the 
U.S. military department or 
agency that is executing the 
sale on behalf of the U.S. 
Government 

e.g., B=Army, D=Air Force, 
P=Navy 

Security 
Cooperation 
Case 
Designator 

Enter a 4 character alphanumeric code. 
A Security Cooperation Case 
Designator is used to reflect a FMS 
contractural sales agreement (Letter of 
Offer and Acceptance) between the US 
and an eligible foreign country 

T22 in SFIS; 

e.g., UAK 

Security 
Cooperation 
Case Line Item 
Identifier 

The Security Cooperation Case Line 
Item Identifier is used to identify a 
detailed line item requirement 
contained within the (Letter of Offer 
and Acceptance). 

 

Sub-Allocation 

Identifies an organization to which 
funds have been Sub-Allocated. 
Maximum length is 4 characters. 

Use of this data element is exclusive to 
sub-allocation purposes, useful for 
Financial Reporting. 

e.g.,2054 

Accounting 
Identifier 

The Agency Accounting Identifier Code 
identifies the accounting system 
responsible for recording the 
accounting event. The Agency 
Accounting Identifier Code is intended 
to be an accounting system identifier, 
and therefore must be assigned to only 
one accounting system. Maximum 
length is 6 characters. 

O3 in SFIS; Fiscal Station 
Number; Comptroller 
defined, e.g., 021001 

Funding Center 
Identifier 

Enter a 16-character alphanumeric 
code. A Funding Center is a clearly 
defined responsibility area within an 
organizational unit to which budget 
authority is assigned 

Cost Object/Cost Accounting 
(CA) section in SFIS, e.g., Air 
Force = OAC, OBAN 

Cost Center 
Identifier 

Enter a 16-character alphanumeric 
code. A Cost Center is a clearly defined 
responsibility area where costs are 
incurred. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Navy = BCN 

Project 
Identifier 

Enter a 25-character code. A planned 
undertaking of work to be performed 
or product to be produced having a 
finite beginning and end. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Army = WBS 

Activity 
Identifier 

Enter a 16-character code. An Activity 
is a series of events, tasks, or units of 
work that are linked to perform a 
specific objective. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Army = Activity/Network 

Disburser 
Identifier 

The Agency Disbursing Identifier is 
assigned to each disbursing office by 
the United States Department of the 
Treasury. The Agency Disbursing 
Identifier is an identification number 
that indicates authority to receive and 

 


disburse public funds and issue checks 
on the United States Department of 
the Treasury. 

Cost Element 
Code 

Enter a 15-character alphanumeric 
code. A Cost Element is a classification 
of an organization's revenues, 
expenses or consumable 
resources. Cost Element Code only 
relates to primary cost. Cost Element 
Code does not relate to secondary cost 
which is identified as agency specific 
and not enterprise-level. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Army = Commitment Item 

Work Order 
Number 

Enter a 16-character alphanumeric 
code that identifies an individual unit 
of work, batch, or lot of a distinct 
product or service. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Army = Internal Order, Air 
Force = Job Order 

Functional Area 

Enter a 16-character alphanumeric 
code. A Functional Area is a logical 
division of a Component's business 
operations. It represents the 
Functions the Component performs. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Army = Functional Area, Air 
Force = Budget/Project 

Parent Award 
Identifier 
(PAID) 

The identifier of the procurement 
award under which the specific award 
is issued (such as a Federal Supply 
Schedule). Term currently applies to 
procurement actions only. Maximum 
length is 50 characters. 

 

Procurement 
Instrument 
Identifier (PIID) 

The unique identifier for each contract, 
agreement or order. Maximum length 
is 50 characters. 

 

 

 

14. Fill in the appropriate Shipping Information fields based on the information provided in the table below: 

 

Shipping Information 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Additional Info 

Enter any additional information not covered in other areas 

 

15. Click on the Submit For Requesting Approval button at the bottom of any Order screen. 

16. In the Submit for Approval box, click on Yes . (Clicking No returns you to the previous screen). 

- If the Order passes the data validation stage, a message stating “Success – Order submitted for Servicing 
Agency Approval ” will display, and notifications will be sent to the Servicing Agency approvers if they have subscribed 
to them. 

- Once the Servicing Agency sends the Order for Approval, the Preparer information for the Servicing Agency will autofill 
in the Prepared By section. 

- If the Order does not pass the data validation stage, a message stating “Data Validation Failed. Please Correct 
Invalid Data ” will appear at the top of the Order. If you look on the left side of the Order page, a red oval will display 
to the right of one or more section names. The number in the middle of the red oval will denote the number of errors 
that need to be corrected within that section before the Order can be submitted for approval. 

For each section that displays a red oval, click on the section name to view the specific data/fields that need to be 
addressed. The items that need to be corrected will be underlined in red, along with a brief description of the error 
provided just below the data/field itself. 


In the example below, there was one error noted in the Billing section of the Order. Clicking on Billing in the menu on 
the left revealed that the Billing Frequency field was left empty, with the text “Required ” displayed beneath it. 



Filling out the field by selecting one of the choices provided in the drop-down menu will remove the red oval from the 
section menu. You may also remove the large error message at the top of the Order by clicking on the red “X” in the far 
right side of the error message box. 

When all of the errors have been cleared, click on the Submit For Servicing Approval button to forward the Order on 
for approvals. If the Order passes data validation, notifications will be sent to the Servicing Agency approvers via email 
if they have subscribed to them. 

 

How to Submit an Order for Approval as the Requesting Agency once it has been sent to you by the 
Servicing Agency: 

 

1. Log in to G-Invoicing. 

2. From the Requesting Agency drop-down menu, click on Orders . The Requesting Agency Order Summary Page 
appears. 

3. Search for an Order in a Shared with Requesting status, then click on the Order# to view it. 

4. The Order opens with the Partner Information section displaying by default. Complete the Partner Information 
section of the Order based on information provided in the table below: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Group Name 

Group information available in the drop-down menu will depend 
on the Organizational Groups a user has access to. 

Requesting 
Agency Cost 
Center (Optional) 

Requesting Agency Cost Center information available in the 
drop-down menu will depend on the Cost Center information 
entered in the GT&C. 

Requesting 
Agency Business 
Unit (Optional) 

Requesting Agency Business Unit information available in the 
drop-down menu will depend on the Business Unit information 
entered in the GT&C. 

Requesting 
Agency 
Department ID 
(Optional) 

Requesting Agency Department ID information available in the 
drop-down menu will depend on the Department ID information 
entered in the GT&C. 

Order Tracking 
Number 

Enter an internal tracking number for your agency, if 
applicable. Maximum value: 50 characters. 

Unique Entity ID 

A distinct identifier which is used to identify a specific 
commercial, nonprofit, or Government entity. 12 characters. 

Comments 

Any additional comments associated with the Order. 1000 
character maximum. 

 


5. Click on the Authority section on the left side of the page , and fill in the appropriate fields based on the information 
provided in the table below: 

Field Name 

Description 

Corresponding field 
on the IAA 7600B 
form 

Program 
Authority 

 

 

Program Authority 
Title 

Enter the Requesting Agency Program 
Authority Title, up to 100 characters. 

N/A 

Program Authority 
Citation 
(Conditional) 

If you entered a Program Authority 
Title, enter the Requesting Agency 
Program Authority Citation up to 100 
characters. 

N/A 

Statutory 
Authority 

 

 

Statutory 
Authority 
Fund Type Code 
(Required) 

This field is only available to the 
Servicing Agency. 

Block #18 

Statutory 
Authority Fund 
Type Title 
(Conditional) 

 

 This field is only available to the 
Servicing Agency. 

Block #19 

Statutory 
Authority Fund 
Type Citation 
(Conditional) 

This field is only available to the 
Servicing Agency. 

Block #20 

 

6. Requesting Agencies may skip the Advance section as it is only available to the Servicing Agency. 

 

7. Click on the Delivery section on the left side of the page , and fill in the appropriate fields based on the information in 
provided in the table below: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

FOB Point (Required) 

This field should be auto-populated for the Requesting 
Agency. 

The Freight On Board (FOB) Point identifies the Buyer 
and Seller agreed upon method for transfer of 
ownership. 

FOB largely determines which Performance reporting 
rules are applied for Order settlement, and ultimately 
which Performance reports will trigger Order settlement. 

One of the following selections for where the transfer of 
responsibility for the goods will display: 

Source/Origin – Transfer of ownership and Settlement 
occurs when the Servicing Agency reports Performance; 
Source should be used when the Servicing Agency 
wishes to control settlement. 

Destination – Transfer of ownership occurs when a 
Requesting Agency reports Performance; Settlement is 
then triggered when a Buyer reports Performance or the 
Constructive Receipt Days have passed/occurred, 
whichever happens first. Destination should be used 
when a Requesting Agency wishes to control settlement, 
and the Servicing Agency will be delivering goods or 


services to their final destination. 

Other –This is treated the same as FOB Destination. 
However, “Other” should only be used when a Servicing 
Agency is delivering goods or services to a location that 
is somewhere between origin and destination. 

 

CRITICAL NOTE : It is important that the proper FOB 
point be chosen as it will have a great impact on 
Performance . 

 

Constructive Receipt Days 
(Conditional) 

This field will auto-populate for the Requesting Agency. 

The CRD field is required to be filled in if the FOB Point 
has been selected as Destination . 

CRDs are the number of elapsed calendar days (from the 
Servicing Agency's delivered/performed action) after 
which received/accepted is assumed to occur by the 
Requesting Agency. The maximum amount of days that 
can be entered is 90. 

Note : This field can only be entered and/or modified by 
the agency that created the Order. 

Acceptance Point 

This field will auto-populate for the Requesting Agency. 
One of the following selections for where the acceptance 
of responsibility for the goods occurs will display: 

Source/Origin 

Destination 

Place of Acceptance 

Enter the location where the goods were delivered and/or 
accepted. 

Inspection Point 

This field will auto-populate for the Requesting Agency. 
One of the following selections for where the inspection 
of the goods occurs will display: 

Source/Origin 

Destination 

Place of Inspection 

Enter the location where the inspection of the goods 
occurs. 

 

 8. Requesting Agencies may skip the Billing section as it is only available to the Servicing Agency. 

9. Click on the Point of Contact section on the left side of the page , and fill in the appropriate fields based on the 
information provided in the table below: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Name (Required) 

Enter the full name of the Requesting Agency Point of 
Contact (POC). 

Email (Required) 

Enter an official email address for the Requesting Agency 
POC. 

Phone (Required) 

Enter a phone number for the Requesting Agency POC. 

Fax 

Enter a fax number for the Requesting Agency POC. 

 

10. Skip the Prepared By section. The Preparer information will automatically be filled in once the Servicing Agency 
sends the Order for Approval. 

 

11. Click on a Line from the list on the left side of the page. 

 

12. Click on the notepad/pencil icon in the Line # field to review the Line Item Summary fields. Please note that the 


Requesting Agency will not be able to modify these fields. 

 

 13. From the menu on the left-hand side of the page, click on the Schedule for each Line number on the Order, and 
fill in the appropriate fields based on information in the table below: 

Field Name 

Description 

Funding Information 

 

Treasury Account 
Symbol 

(See Description on the 
right for required 
values.) 

 

Enter the Treasury Account Symbol (TAS) for the Requesting 
Agency by clicking on the magnifying glass icon on the right 
side of the field. You may select the proper TAS from the dropdown 
menu, or you may manually enter each TAS component 
in the appropriate boxes. Please note that only TAS values 
related to DISGF , and DISNGF BETCs will be displayed in the 
drop-down menu or will be accepted by the system if entered 
manually. 

The TAS is a grouping of three specific United States 
Department of the Treasury funding-related codes that identify 
specific United States Department of the Treasury accounts 
using receipt, appropriation, expenditure, and other fund 
account symbols and titles as assigned by the United States 
Department of the Treasury and the Office of Management and 
Budget. 

Required values : AID (3 digits), MAIN (4 digits), and SUB 
(3 digits) 

BETC (Required) 

 

Select a BETC (Business Event Type Code) for the Requesting 
Agency from the drop-down menu. The available BETCs are: 

 

DISGF 

DISNGF 

 

The BETC is an eight-character code used in the Central 
Accounting Reporting System (CARS) to indicate the type of 
activity being reported (borrowing, repayment, offsetting 
collection, receipt, disbursement, etc.). This code must 
accompany the TAS and the dollar amounts to classify the 
transaction against the fund balance with United States 
Department of the Treasury. 

Object Class Code 

Select an object class code from the list and click add to move 
it to the list box to the right. 

The Federal Government uses an Object Class Code to record 
its financial transactions according to the nature of the services 
provided or received when obligations first incur. 

Additional Accounting 
Classification 

Add any additional accounting information required for agency 
internal tracking purposes, if needed (320 alphanumeric 
characters maximum). 

SLOA (see below) 

 

 

Use the Standard Line of Accounting (SLOA) fields to enter or edit identification codes used by the Requesting Agency or 
the Servicing Agency. The SLOA’s variable length and alphanumeric codes provide a uniform system of reference 
information to the agency’s original obligating document and verify that billings are properly charged. Shown on all 
purchase requests, resulting obligation and expenditure documents, SLOA codes convey key accounting information, 
such as the department within the agency using the funds; the specific appropriation charged for the purchase of 
goods/services; the organization responsible for accounting and reporting of the obligation and payment; and the 
payment type for the specific transaction. 

The SLOA fields include fiscal year dates, accounting codes, and agency disbursing identification. 

 

To enter SLOA information as the Requesting Agency: 

 

13. Fill in the appropriate fields in the SLOA section based on the information provided in the table below: 

 


 

Field Name 

Description 

Source Reference 

Accounting 
Classification 
Reference 
Number 

Enter the Requesting Agency 
Accounting Classification Reference 
Number (ACRN). 

Maximum length is 2 alphanumeric 
characters. 

The ACRN comprises first of ten 
elements in a line of accounting. The 
two-digit ACRN identifies each separate 
line of accounting classification data on 
a document citing fund usage to 
ensure that the expenditure properly 
matches the corresponding obligation. 
Assign an ACRN to each line of 
accounting classification data starting 
with “AA.” When there is only one line 
of accounting classification data, the 
ACRN is “AA.” Assign alphanumeric 
ACRNs when alpha codes are 
exhausted. The alpha characters “I” 
and “O” are not used because these 
characters can be confused with ‘0” 
and “1”. Duplication of ACRNs does not 
occur within the same funding 
document. 

 

Reimbursable 
Flag 

The Reimbursable Indicator is a single 
alphabetical code used to flag those 
expenditures incurred for a designated 
TAFS account that are considered 
reimbursable to the account. 

A9 in SFIS; Examples: 
Direct, (D) or Reimbursable 
(R) Code, 

Federal Award 
Identification 
Number 

The Federal Award Identification 
Number (FAIN) is a unique number 
assigned to a financial assistance 
award by the awarding agency. This 
number will identify the award in 
several systems including: ASAP.gov, 
USASpending.gov, and Grants.gov. 
This number along with the CFDS will 
allow for more precise tracking of grant 
obligations and payments. Maximum 
length is 30 characters. 

 

Unique Record 
Identifier 

An agency defined identifier that (when 
provided) is unique for every reported 
action. Maximum length is 70 
characters. 

 

Activity Address 
Code 
(Conditional) 

This field is required if the Business 
Partner Network (BPN) field within the 
Partner Information section of the 
Schedule is left empty. 

The Activity Address Code (AAC) used 
for shipping location. Maximum length 
is 6 characters. 

 

Budget Line 
Item 

Enter a 16-character alphanumeric 
code that further sub-divides the 
Treasury Account Fund Symbol 
appropriation, below the Budget Sub 
Activity Line. 

For military personnel, value is Budget 
Sub-Activity (BSA) plus Budget Line 
Item (BLI). 

B4 in SFIS; Further 
subdivides the Treasury 
Account Fund Symbol below 
sub-activity 

e.g., 111 

Budget Fiscal 
Year 

Enter a 4-digit year. The budget or 
financial year, as opposed to a 

e.g., 2018 


calendar year. The U.S. Government's 
fiscal year runs from October 1 of the 
prior year through September 30 of 
the next year. For example, FY 2015 
was from October 2014 through 
September 2015. 

Security 
Cooperation 

(formerly 
Foreign Military 
Sales/FMS 
Customer 
Code) 

The Security Cooperation Customer 
represents the country receiving the 
product and/or service in the FMS 
transaction. Maximum length is 3 
characters. 

T21 in SFIS; Security 
Cooperation (SC) Customer 

 

Security 
Cooperation 
Implementation 
Agency 

A single character alphabetical code 
which identifies the US Military 
Department or Agency which has 
negotiated or facilitated a foreign 
military sales case on behalf of the US 
Government. The majority of FMS 
cases are implemented by the Army 
(IA Code B), Navy (IA Code P) or Air 
Force (IA Code D) 

T27 in SFIS; Identifies the 
U.S. military department or 
agency that is executing the 
sale on behalf of the U.S. 
Government 

e.g., B=Army, D=Air Force, 
P=Navy 

Security 
Cooperation 
Case 
Designator 

Enter a 4 character alphanumeric code. 
A Security Cooperation Case 
Designator is used to reflect a FMS 
contractural sales agreement (Letter of 
Offer and Acceptance) between the US 
and an eligible foreign country 

T22 in SFIS; 

e.g., UAK 

Security 
Cooperation 
Case Line Item 
Identifier 

The Security Cooperation Case Line 
Item Identifier is used to identify a 
detailed line item requirement 
contained within the (Letter of Offer 
and Acceptance). 

 

Sub-Allocation 

Identifies an organization to which 
funds have been Sub-Allocated. 
Maximum length is 4 characters. 

Use of this data element is exclusive to 
sub-allocation purposes, useful for 
Financial Reporting. 

e.g.,2054 

Accounting 
Identifier 

The Agency Accounting Identifier Code 
identifies the accounting system 
responsible for recording the 
accounting event. The Agency 
Accounting Identifier Code is intended 
to be an accounting system identifier, 
and therefore must be assigned to only 
one accounting system. Maximum 
length is 6 characters. 

O3 in SFIS; Fiscal Station 
Number; Comptroller 
defined, e.g., 021001 

Funding Center 
Identifier 

Enter a 16-character alphanumeric 
code. A Funding Center is a clearly 
defined responsibility area within an 
organizational unit to which budget 
authority is assigned 

Cost Object/Cost Accounting 
(CA) section in SFIS, e.g., Air 
Force = OAC, OBAN 

Cost Center 
Identifier 

Enter a 16-character alphanumeric 
code. A Cost Center is a clearly defined 
responsibility area where costs are 
incurred. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Navy = BCN 

Project 
Identifier 

Enter a 25-character code. A planned 
undertaking of work to be performed 
or product to be produced having a 
finite beginning and end. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Army = WBS 

Activity 
Identifier 

Enter a 16-character code. An Activity 
is a series of events, tasks, or units of 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Army = Activity/Network 


work that are linked to perform a 
specific objective. 

Disburser 
Identifier 

The Agency Disbursing Identifier is 
assigned to each disbursing office by 
the United States Department of the 
Treasury. The Agency Disbursing 
Identifier is an identification number 
that indicates authority to receive and 
disburse public funds and issue checks 
on the United States Department of 
the Treasury. 

 

Cost Element 
Code 

Enter a 15-character alphanumeric 
code. A Cost Element is a classification 
of an organization's revenues, 
expenses or consumable 
resources. Cost Element Code only 
relates to primary cost. Cost Element 
Code does not relate to secondary cost 
which is identified as agency specific 
and not enterprise-level. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Army = Commitment Item 

Work Order 
Number 

Enter a 16-character alphanumeric 
code that identifies an individual unit 
of work, batch, or lot of a distinct 
product or service. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Army = Internal Order, Air 
Force = Job Order 

Functional Area 

Enter a 16-character alphanumeric 
code. A Functional Area is a logical 
division of a Component's business 
operations. It represents the 
Functions the Component performs. 

CA section in SFIS, e.g., 
Army = Functional Area, Air 
Force = Budget/Project 

Parent Award 
Identifier 
(PAID) 

The identifier of the procurement 
award under which the specific award 
is issued (such as a Federal Supply 
Schedule). Term currently applies to 
procurement actions only. Maximum 
length is 50 characters. 

 

Procurement 
Instrument 
Identifier (PIID) 

The unique identifier for each contract, 
agreement or order. Maximum length 
is 50 characters. 

 

 

 

14. Fill in the appropriate Shipping Information fields based on the information provided in the table below: 

 

Shipping Information 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Additional Info 

Enter any additional information not covered in other areas 

 

15. Click on the Submit For Requesting Approval button at the bottom of any Order screen. 

16. In the Submit for Approval box, click on Yes . (Clicking No returns you to the previous screen). 

- If the Order passes the data validation stage, a message stating “Success – Order submitted for Requesting 
Agency Approval ” will display, and notifications will be sent to the Servicing Agency approvers if they have subscribed 
to them. 

- Once the Requesting Agency sends the Order for Approval, the Preparer information for the Requesting Agency will 
auto-fill in the Prepared By section. 

- If the Order does not pass the data validation stage, a message stating “Data Validation Failed. Please Correct 
Invalid Data ” will appear at the top of the Order. If you look on the left side of the Order page, a red oval will display 


to the right of one or more section names. The number in the middle of the red oval will denote the number of errors 
that need to be corrected within that section before the Order can be submitted for approval. 

For each section that displays a red oval, click on the section name to view the specific data/fields that need to be 
addressed. The items that need to be corrected will be underlined in red, along with a brief description of the error 
provided just below the data/field itself. 

In the example below, there were three errors noted in the Point of Contact section of the Order. Clicking on Point of 
Contact in the menu on the left revealed that the Name, Email, and Phone Number fields were left empty, with the text 
“Required ” displayed beneath them. 



Filling out the fields will remove the red ovals from the section menu. You may also remove the large error message at 
the top of the Order by clicking on the red “X” in the far right side of the error message box. 

When all of the errors have been cleared, click on the Submit For Requesting Approval button to forward the Order 
on for approvals. If the Order passes data validation, notifications will be sent to the Servicing Agency approvers via 
email if they have subscribed to them. 


Approving an Order 

Users must have the following roles assigned to their G-Invoicing user accounts to be able to Approve Orders, along 
with the appropriate Groups*: 

- Requesting Agency : Requesting Order Funding Official Approver or Requesting Order Program Official Approver 
role(s) 

- Servicing Agency : Servicing Order Funding Official Approver or Servicing Order Program Official Approver role(s) 

Both the Requesting Agency and Servicing Agency are required to submit an Order for approval. When the Order has a 
status of “Pending Requesting Agency Approval,” the Requesting Agency accesses the Order Approvals page to approve 
the Requesting Agency portion of the Order. The Order shows as “Open” only after the Program Official and Funding 
Official from each agency sign the Order. Once the Order is in an “Open” state, the Servicing Agency can take action on 
it. 

Note : If a Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency creates an Order in its own ERP and sends the Order to G-Invoicing, 
the two approvals by that agency will have already been submitted and will be viewable on the Order in G-Invoicing, 
and only the trading partner on the Order can Approve it through the G-Invoicing user interface (UI). The Order will be 
in Pending Requesting Approval or Pending Servicing Approval until the trading partner approves the Order through the 
UI. 

Please be aware that a Servicing or Requesting Agency will not be able to access and view an Order until the document 
is in a Shared with Servicing or Shared with Requesting status, respectively. 

 

 

How to Approve an Order as the Requesting Agency: 

 

1. Log into G-Invoicing. 

2. From the Requesting Agency drop-down menu, click on Orders . The Order Summary Page appears. 

3. Search for an Order in a Pending Requesting Approval status, then click on the Order# to view it. 

4. Click on Approvals from the menu on the left side of the Order. The Order Approvals Page appears: 

 




 

 

5. In the Funding Official section, click on the notepad icon to the right of Requesting Agency . The following 
information will appear: 

 

 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Name 

The full name of the Requesting Funding Official 
approving the Order will automatically be filled in. 

Title (Required) 

Manually enter the position title of the Requesting 
Funding Official. 

Email 

The official email address of the Requesting Funding 
Official approving the Order will automatically be filled 
in. 

Phone 

The phone number of the Requesting Funding Official 
approving the Order will automatically be filled in. 

Fax (Optional) 

Manually enter a fax number for the Requesting 
Funding Official, if needed. 

Date Signed 

The date the Order was signed by the Requesting 
Funding Official will automatically be filled in. 

 

 

Note: To remove the Requesting Agency Funding Official information you have manually entered in during this stage, 
click on the garbage can icon to the right of Requesting Agency . 

6. Click on the Requesting Agency Approve button at the bottom of the Order. 

7. The Approve Order box will appear. To approve the Order, click Yes . (If you click No, you will be returned to the 
previous page.) 

8. A “Success: Requesting Agency Approve Successful" message will display. 

Next, information provided in the table below will need to be entered for the Requesting Agency Program Official . If 
the user who performed the Funding Official approval also holds the Requesting Program Official Approver role, they 
may continue the Requesting Agency approval process in the same session. Otherwise, a user with the proper role will 
need to log into G-Invoicing, and complete the Requesting Agency approval process as the Program Official. 

1. In the Program Official section, click on the notepad icon to the right of Requesting Agency . The following 
information will appear: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Name 

The full name of the Requesting Program Official 
approving the Order will automatically be filled in. 

Title (Required) 

Manually enter the position title of the Requesting 
Program Official. 

Email 

The official email address of the Requesting Program 
Official approving the Order will automatically be filled in. 

Phone 

The phone number of the Requesting Program Official 
approving the Order will automatically be filled in. 

Fax (Optional) 

Manually enter a fax number for the Requesting Program 
Official, if needed. 

Date Signed 

The date the Order was signed by the Requesting Funding 
Official will automatically be filled in. 

 


Note: To remove all of the Requesting Agency Program Official information you have manually entered in during this 
stage, click on the garbage can icon to the right of Requesting Agency . 

2. Click on the Requesting Agency Approve button at the bottom of the Order. 

3. The Approve Order box will appear. To approve the Order, click Yes . (If you click No, you will be returned to the 
previous page.) 

4. A “Success: Requesting agency Approve Successful " message will display. 

- If the Requesting Agency created the Order, the Requesting Agency Approve Button will disappear from the bottom of 
the Order Approvals Page, and the Order itself will change to a Shared with Servicing status once the Requesting 
Agency Funding and Program Officials have both approved the Order. 

- If the Servicing Agency created the Order, the Requesting Agency Approve Button will disappear from the bottom of 
the Order Approvals Page, and the Order itself changes to an Open status once the Requesting Agency Funding and 
Program Officials have both approved the Order. 

 

 

 

How to Approve an Order as the Servicing Agency: 

 

1. Log in to G-Invoicing . 

2. Click on the Servicing Agency drop-down menu, then click on, click the Orders . The Order Summary Page appears. 

3. Search for an Order in a Pending Servicing Approval status, then click on the Order# to view it. 

4. Click on Approvals from the menu on the left side of the Order. The Order Approvals Page appears: 

 



 

5. In the Funding Official section, click on the notepad icon to the right of Servicing Agency . The following 
information will appear: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Name 

The full name of the Servicing Funding Official 
approving the Order will automatically be filled in. 


Title (Required) 

Manually enter the position title of the Servicing 
Funding Official. 

Email 

The official email address of the Servicing Funding 
Official approving the Order will automatically be filled 
in. 

Phone 

The phone number of the Servicing Funding Official 
approving the Order will automatically be filled in. 

Fax (Optional) 

Manually enter a fax number for the Servicing Funding 
Official, if needed. 

Date Signed 

The date the Order was signed by the Servicing 
Funding Official will automatically be filled in. 

 

Note: To remove all of the Servicing Agency Funding Official information you have manually entered in during this 
stage, click on the garbage can icon to the right of Servicing Agency . 

6. Click on the Servicing Agency Approve button at the bottom of the Order. 

7. The Approve Order box will appear. To approve the Order, click Yes . (If you click No, you will be returned to the 
previous page.) 

8. A “Success: Servicing Agency Approve Successful” message will display. 

Next, information provided in the table below will need to be entered for the Servicing Agency Program Official . If 
the user who performed the Funding Official approval also holds the Servicing Program Official Approver role, they may 
continue the Servicing Agency approval process in the same session. Otherwise, a user with the proper role will need to 
log into G-Invoicing, and complete the Servicing Agency approval process as the Program Official. 

1. In the Program Official section, click on the notepad icon to the right of Servicing Agency . The following 
information will appear: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Name 

The full name of the Servicing Program Official 
approving the Order will automatically be filled in. 

Title (Required) 

Manually enter the position title of the Servicing 
Program Official. 

Email 

The official email address of the Servicing Program 
Official approving the Order will automatically be filled 
in. 

Phone 

The phone number of the Servicing Program Official 
approving the Order will automatically be filled in. 

Fax (Optional) 

Manually enter a fax number for the Servicing Program 
Official, if needed. 

Date Signed 

The date the Order was signed by the Servicing 
Program Official will automatically be filled in. 

 

Note: To remove all of the Servicing Agency Funding Official information you have manually entered during this stage, 
click on the garbage can icon to the right of Servicing Agency . 

 

2. Click on the Servicing Agency Approve button at the bottom of the Order. 

3. The Approve Order box will appear. To approve the Order, click Yes . (If you click No, you will be returned to the 
previous page.) 

4. A “Success: Servicing Agency Approve Successful ” message will display. 


- If the Serving Agency created the Order, the Servicing Agency Approve Button will disappear from the bottom of the 
Order Approvals Page, and the Order itself will change to a Shared with Requesting status once the Servicing Agency 
Funding and Program Officials have both approved the Order. 

- If the Requesting Agency created the Order, the Servicing Agency Approve Button will disappear from the bottom of 
the Order Approvals Page, and the Order itself changes to an Open status once the Servicing Agency Funding and 
Program Officials have both approved the Order. 


Rejecting an Order 

A user with the Requesting/Servicing Funding Official Approver or Requesting/Servicing Program Official Approver roles 
may Reject an Order. Please be aware of the following: 

- Users may only reject an Order that is in a Pending Requesting Agency Approval or Pending Servicing Agency 
Approval status. 

- If an Order has been approved by one of the Requesting or Servicing Agency Approvers, it may still be rejected by the 
other Approver from the same agency. For instance, if an Order is approved by a Requesting Agency Funding Official, 
the same Order may be rejected by the Requesting Agency Program Official. 

- Once a Funding Official has already approved an Order, they will not be able to reject the Order. Likewise, once a 
Program Official has approved an Order, they will not be able to reject the same Order. 

- An Order in a Rejected status may be moved back to a Draft status by a Requesting Manager or a Servicing Manager 
so that it may be updated/corrected and resubmitted for approval. Please see the topic How to Return a Rejected Order 
Back to a Draft Status . 

- An Order in a Pending Servicing Agency Approval status may be sent from a Servicing Approver back to a 
Servicing Manager to be updated/corrected. Please see the topic How to Return an Order to a Shared with Servicing 
Status . 

 

How to Reject an Order: 

1. From the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, click on Orders. G-Invoicing will then 
display the Order Summary page. 

2. Locate an Order in a Pending Requesting Agency Approval or Pending Servicing Agency Approval status that 
you wish to reject, and click on its name in the Order# column to open it. 

3. Click the Reject button on the bottom of the page. G-Invoicing displays the Reject Order box. 

4. In the Reject Order Reason field, type in a comment, and then click Reject Order: 



 

5. The Confirmation box will appear. Click Yes to reject the Order. (If you click No, you will be returned to the Reject 
Order box.) 

6. A message stating “Success: Order Rejected ” will appear at the top of the Order. 

7. The Order will then move to a Rejected status, and will only be visible to the agency that created the Order. 

Please be aware that once an Order is rejected, the Funding Official and Program Official information contained in 
its Approvals section will disappear. 


Returning a Rejected Order Back to a Draft Status 

Once an Order has been Rejected, a Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency may leave the Order in a Rejected 
status, or they may return the Order back to a Draft status. Once the Order is back in a Draft status, it may then be 
updated/corrected, and then resubmitted for approval. 

How to Return a Rejected Order Back to a Draft Status: 

1. From the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, click on Orders . G-Invoicing will then 
display the Order Summary page. 

2. Locate an Order in a Rejected status that you wish to return to Draft , and click on its name in the Order# column 
to open it. 

3. Click the Return To Draft button on the bottom of the page. 

4. A “Success Updated ” message will display at the top of the Order. 

The Order will move to a Draft status. A Requesting Order Manager or Servicing Order Manager will then be able to 
update the Order and resubmit it for approval. 

 


Returning an Order to a Shared With Requesting or Shared With 
Servicing Status 

A Requesting Agency Approver or a Servicing Agency Approver may return an Order in a Pending Requesting 
Approval or Pending Servicing Approval status back to a Requesting Order Manager or Servicing Order Manager to 
be updated/corrected without having to Reject the Order outright. 

 

How to Return an Order to a Shared With Requesting or Shared With Servicing Status: 

 

1. From the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, click on Orders . G-Invoicing will then 
display the Order Summary page. 

2. Locate an Order in a Pending Requesting Approval or Pending Servicing Approval status that you wish to 
return, and click on its name in the Order# column to open it. 

3. Click the Return To Shared with Requesting or Return to Shared with Servicing button on the bottom of the 
page. 

4. A “Success: Order returned to Shared With Requesting or Shared With Servicing ” message will display. 

The Order will move to a Shared with Requesting or Shared with Servicing status. A Requesting Order Manager or 
Servicing Order Manager will then be able to update the Order and resubmit it for approval. 


Checking an Order's Status 

How To Check an Order's Status: 

From the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menu, click Orders . 

The Order Summary Page will appear. View the Status column for the current status of the Order. 

Note : Orders in a Draft status will only be visible to the agencies that created them, and will not appear on the Order 
Summary pages of the trading partner. 

 


Order Audit History 

The Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency can access an Order Audit History to view the actions taken on an Order 
once it has been saved as a Draft. G-Invoicing organizes actions taken on an Order chronologically, with the newest 
actions displayed at the top of the window. 

Items in the Order Audit History cannot be edited or deleted. 

How to View an Order Audit History: 

 

1. Under the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, click on Orders . 

2. Click on any Order# . 

3. Click on the Options button on the right side of the page. 

4. Click on Audit History . The Audit History box will display: 

 



 

- The Order Audit Trail displays the following information: 

 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Date 

Date of the action 

Action 

Type of action taken (i.e. Order Created or Order Approved) 

User 

The User ID of the user who performed the associated action 

Comment 

A brief explanation of the action taken on the Order 

 

 

5. To return to the Order, click on the “X” in the top right corner of the Audit History box. 

 

 

 


Modifying an Order 

Orders that are in an Open or Closed status may only be Modified by the agency (Requesting or Servicing) that created 
them. Please note that modifying an Order will do the following: 

- Any existing Approvals will be removed from the Order, and any modifications made to the Order will require the 
Order to be re-approved by both the Requesting and Servicing Agencies 

If there is any Performance against an Order, there will be restrictions on what fields can be modified on the Order: 

- An Order Line cannot be cancelled if there is any Performance against it 

- An Order Schedule cannot be cancelled if there is any Performance against it 

- The Order Schedule Quantity cannot be lowered such that the remaining balance for any Performance Type drops 
below zero 

- Agency Location Codes (ALCs) and Treasury Account Symbols (TASs) cannot be changed on Orders that have 
any Performance generated off of them 

 

 

 

How to Modify an Order: 

 

1. From the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, click on Orders , and locate an Order in an 
Open or Closed status. 

2. Click on the Order# . 

3. Click on the Modify button on the bottom of any Order page. 

4. Click on Yes to modify the Order. (Clicking No will return you to the previous Order page.) 

5. A Success: Draft Updated message should appear, and the Order number should update with a new version 
number following the decimal (i.e., if the original Order number was O1806-010-020-000948.0, it will update to O1806- 
010-020-000948.1). The status of the Order will move to Draft . 

6. Click on the Order sections in the column on the left-hand side of the page to access the fields that are available for 
modification. It is advised that you save your modifications often by clicking on the Update Draft button at the bottom 
of each Order page as Orders do not self-save. 

7. When you are done making all of the needed modifications, click on Submit for Requesting Approval or Submit 
for Servicing Approval . 

8. Click on Yes to submit the Order for Requesting Approval. (Clicking on No will return you to the previous page.) 

9. After clicking Yes, a Success: Updated message should appear, and the modified Order will be required to be reapproved 
by both the Requesting and Servicing Agencies. The status of the Order will update to Pending Requesting 
Approval or Pending Servicing Approval . 


Approving an Order Modification 

G-Invoicing notifies subscribed Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency users if an Order is in a Pending Approval 
status by sending the Intragov Order Created or Changed Notification via email. The applicable agency then opens 
the Order and Approves or Rejects the modification. 

 

How to Approve an Order Modification: 

 

1. From the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, click on Orders . The Orders Summary List 
appears. 

2. From the Order# column, click on an Order with a status of Pending Requesting Approval or Pending Servicing 
Approval . G-Invoicing will then open the Order, and will display the Partner Information section as a default. 

3. From the column on the left side of the page, click on Approvals . The Approvals section of the Order will then 
display. 

4. Under the Approval section, click on the notepad icon to the right of either Requesting Agency or Servicing 
Agency in the Funding Official or Program Official sections. 

5. When selected, G-Invoicing populates the date, signer’s name, email address, and phone number fields with 
information from the user’s profile. Users will not be able to edit these fields. 

6. Enter your occupational title in the Title field (required) . 

7. Enter your fax number (optional). 

8. Click the Requesting Agency Approve or Servicing Agency Approve button at the bottom of the page . 

9. In the confirmation box, click Yes to Approve the Order. (Clicking on No returns you to the previous page.) 

10. A Success: Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency Approve Successful message will display. 

 

G-Invoicing will display the Order in both the Requesting Agency and Servicing Agency Order Summary Pages in an 
Open status after both agencies have fully granted their approvals. The system will also generate and send the 
Intragov Order Created or Changed Notification email to subscribed Requesting Agency and Servicing Agency users. 

Note: Once an Order is approved, neither the Funding Official nor the Program Official may reject an Order. 


Exporting an Order Modification History 

How to Export an Order Modification History: 

 

1. From the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, click on Orders . 

2. When the Orders Summary Page appears, locate an Order that you know has been modified*, and click on the 
Order# to open it. 

3. Click on the Export History button at the bottom of the screen: 



 

4. Click on Open to display the .csv file immediately, or click Save to send the .csv file to a location on your machine or 
network. 

When you open the Modification History file, the original Order details will appear on the last line of the spread sheet. 
Each subsequent modification made to the Order will appear in the lines directly above it, starting with the number “1” 
noted in the Order Mod # column. 

*An Order that has been modified will have a number greater than zero (0) after the decimal point in its Order#. For 
example, Order# O1910-011-011-005598.0 is an Order that has not been modified. Order# O1910-011-011-005598.2 
is an Order that has been modified twice. 


Making Admin Changes to an Order 

Limited administrative changes (i.e., updates to an Order Tracking Number, updates to Point of Contact information, 
etc.) may be made to an Order in an Open status that has Performance against it. Admin Changes to an Open Order do 
not require the Order to be re-approved, and do not have any effect on an Order’s Open status. 

Please note that only users who hold the Requesting Agency Order Manager and Servicing Agency Order Manager Roles 
assigned to their user accounts may perform Admin Changes on Orders. 

 

 

How to Make an Admin Change to an Order: 

 

1. From the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, click on Orders , and locate an Order in an 
Open status. 

2. Click on the Order# . 

3. Click on the Admin button located on the bottom of the page. (Once this is done, the Admin button will change to a 
Save button.) 

4. Click on the sections in the column on the left-hand side of the Order to access the fields that are available for Admin 
Changes. 

5. Once all Admin Changes have been made, click on the Save button on the bottom of any Order page. (Note: If you 
would like to cancel your changes, click on the Cancel button at the bottom of the page. When the Cancel Admin 
Changes box appears, click on Yes to cancel the changes, or click on No to return to the Order itself.) 

6. Click on Yes if you would like to proceed with the change. (Clicking on No will return you to the previous Order 
page.) 

7. After clicking on Yes, a Success: Updated message will display. 


Copying an Order 

A copy of an existing Order may be created by Requesting Agencies and Servicing Agencies. When copying Orders, 
users should be aware of the following: 

- Copies will open in a Draft status with a new Order number 

- Copying an existing Order will remove both the Requesting Agency and Service Agency Approvals if the original 
Order has passed the Approval stage 

- Any attachments included on the original Order will not be copied over to the new Order 

- If a TAS used on an existing Order has been removed from the Group used to create the Order and/or the TAS is no 
longer valid, the TAS information from the existing Order will not be included on the copy of the Order. 

- Once a copy is created, it may be edited as needed 

 

 

How to Copy an Existing Order: 

 

1. From the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agencies drop-down menu, click on Orders . 

2. Click on the Order# of any existing Order on the Orders Summary Page. 

3. At the bottom of the page, click on Copy Order . 

4. If you wish to copy the Order, click Yes in the Copy Order box. Otherwise, click No to return to the original Order 
page. 

5. After clicking “Yes”, a Success: New Draft Created message will appear, and you will automatically be placed on 
the first page of the new Order. 


Printing an Order 

You may print a hard copy of any given Order that is in any status except for Delete . Please be advised that an Order 
may only be printed after it has been saved at least one time. 

Note : The information displayed on an Order printed out of G-Invoicing will not exactly match the information that may 
be included on a United States Department of the Treasury 7600B Order "paper" form. 

 

How to Print an Order: 

 

1. From the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, click on Orders . The Order Summary Page 
will appear. 

2. Locate the Order you would like to print, and click on its Order# to open it. 

3. Click on the Options button near the top right side of the page, and then click on Print in the drop-down menu. 

4. The name of the .pdf file should appear in the lower left corner or in the lower center of the page. Click on the .pdf 
file name to open it or click on Open ; the file will open in a new tab, and the Order will display as a United States 
Department of the Treasury 7600B form. 

- To print the Order on paper, click on the Print icon in the top right corner of the .pdf. When the .pdf Print box 
appears, select the printer of your choice, then click on Print . (Clicking on Cancel returns you to the .pdf itself.) Please 
note that printing a .pdf may be slightly different depending on the internet browser you may be using. 

- To save the Order as a .pdf file, click on the Download icon near the top right corner of the .pdf . Then choose a file 
name, select a location to save your file, and click Save . (Clicking on Cancel returns you to the .pdf itself.) 

5. Clicking on the “X” on the file tab at the top of the page will close the .pdf, and will return you to the Order itself. 


Deleting an Order 

Orders may only be deleted from G-Invoicing if they meet the following criteria: 

- The GT&C they have been created off of cannot be in a Closed status. 

- Orders that have not been Modified* may be deleted by the agency that created them (Requesting Agency or 
Servicing Agency) only if they are in a Draft status. Unwanted Orders that have moved beyond the Draft stage and are 
in a Shared With Servicing or Shared With Requesting status may be Rejected by agency Approvers during the 
Approval process. Once an Order is in a Rejected status (and if the GT&C that it was created off of is not in a Closed 
status) the agency that created it can click on the Return to Draft button located on the bottom of the Order, then 
follow the instructions below to Delete it. 

*Orders that have been Modified cannot be deleted. To tell if an Order has been Modified, look at any given Order 
number: if the number has anything greater than zero past the decimal point, it has been Modified. For example, if an 
Order number appears as O1904-020-020-000722.0, it has not been Modified. If an Order number appears as O1904- 
020-020-000722.2, it has been Modified twice. Unwanted Modified Orders may be Rejected during the Approval process 
and left in a Rejected status. 

 

How to Delete an Order: 

 

1. Log in to G-Invoicing, and from the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menu, click on Orders . 
The Orders Summary Page will appear. 

2. Locate an Order in a Draft status that you would like to Delete, and click on the Order # to view it. 

3. Click on the Delete button at the bottom of the Order page. 

4. Click on Yes to delete the Order. (Clicking on No will return you to the Order page.) 

5. A Success: Updated message box will appear, and the Order Status will move to Deleted . 

6. Click on the Orders sub tab to return to the Orders Summary page. The Order you have just deleted should no 
longer appear in the Orders Summary List. 


Closing an Order 

Orders created by a Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency may only be closed by Requesting Agency users who 
hold either the Requesting Order Funding Official Approver or Requesting Order Program Official Approver roles in their 
G-Invoicing user accounts. 

To be able to Close an Order, at least one of the following conditions must be met on all of the Schedules on the Order: 

 

- Unpaid quantity is zero, meaning that the Schedule was fully performed (and paid), or that the Schedule Quantity has 
been modified down to the amount that was performed (and paid) 

- Most recent Delivered (DLV) has a final performance indicator of “F” or Final, meaning the Servicing agency considers 
the Schedule fully completed. This also includes DLV Adjustments. 

- Cancelled Schedule. (Please be advised that you cannot cancel a Schedule if any Performance has been reported 
against it.) 

 

Please note that you will not be able to close an Order that has any outstanding Performance against it. In addition, an 
Order may not be closed when it is out of balance. Other scenarios when you would not be able to Close an Order : 

- Order is not in an Open status 

- Performance transaction in Pending Status 

- Advanced quantity (including future advances) must equal the quantity Delivered/Performed 

- Imbalance in Performance details recorded against on a Schedule by the Servicing agency and Requesting agency. For 
example, the Total quantity Delivered/Performed against a Schedule must equal the total quantity Received/Accepted, if 
(a) FOB Point is ‘Destination’ or ‘Other’ and (b) the Schedule is not Advanced. Also, the Total quantity 
Delivered/Performed against a Schedule must equal the total quantity Received/Accepted if the quantity 
Received/Accepted is provided 

Note : Received/Accepted is not required when FOB is Source, or when conducted against an Advanced Performance 
type (whether FOB is Source or Destination) . However, it is conditional: if Received/Accepted is selected on any part of 
a Schedule, it becomes required for every Delivered/Performed transaction on that particular Schedule. 

 

If you are unable to Close an Order, please click on Orders in Process and review the Delivery Status or Order 
Imbalance for the Order in question. 

 

 

 

How to Close an Order: 

 

1. From the Requesting Agency drop-down menu, click on Orders . G-Invoicing displays the Order Summary page. 

2. Locate an Order in an Open status that you would like to close, and click on the Order# to view it. 

3. The Order will display the Partner Information section as the default. At the bottom of any Order page, click on the 
Close Order button. 

4. The Close Order box will appear: 




5. In the Close Order Reason field, enter the reason why you are closing the Order. 

6. Click the Close Order button to close the Order. (Clicking Cancel will return you to the previous screen.) 

7. The Confirmation box will appear. Click yes if you are sure you would like to close the Order. (Clicking No returns 
you to the Close Order box.) 

8. A “Success Order Closed ” message will appear at the top of the Order, and the Order will then move to a Closed 
status. 

Once an Order is closed, it can only be reopened through a Modification . 


Exporting Order Summaries or Details to a .CSV File 

Users who hold the permission(s) related to viewing Orders may export lists of their agency’s Order Summaries and 
Order Details to .csv files. 

- Export Summary: Will export basic Order information as it appears on the Orders Summary page. 

- Export Details: Will export much more detailed Order information, such as Line Item data. 

Please be aware that the Orders exports function will only return results based on any/all filters you may have selected 
on the Orders Summary page. For example, as a Requesting Agency, if you have selected only to display Order 
Summaries for GT&C number A1711-012-000001 that are in a Draft status, and you click on the Export Summary 
button, the .csv file will only contain a list of Order Summaries that match those filters. If no filters have been selected, 
the .csv file will show all of your agency’s Order Summaries in any status. 

Note : At this time, the maximum amount of documents that can display in an Export Details report is 500 . If you 
attempt to generate an export with more than 500 documents, the system will display a 500 line limit error message. If 
you receive the error message, please attempt to narrow down the search results on your Summary Page by using 
filters (i.e., display documents by month, year, etc.), then running separate reports. Once the separate reports have 
been run, you may consolidate them into a single file if you wish. 

 

How to Export Order Summaries or Details to a .CSV File: 

 

1. Log in to G-Invoicing, and click on either the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency tabs. 

2. Click on the Orders sub-tab. 

3. When the Orders Summary page appears, click on either the Export Summary or Export Details buttons: 



4. Click on Open to display the .csv file immediately, or click Save to send the .csv file to a location on your machine or 
network. 


About Performance 

A Performance Transaction is the exchange of data which indicates that the IGT Buy/Sell activity that has been agreed 
upon between Requesting and Servicing Agencies has been completed. 

The Performance portion of the Buy/Sell process uses Federal Intra-governmental Data Standards (FIDS) to enforce the 
exchange of data, which in turn ensures accurate and timely accounting entries. Performance Transactions provide 
key triggers for the recording of accounting entries related to Accruals, Advances, and Liquidations. 

It is important to note that Performance may initiate Settlement based on the following: 

 

- Freight on Board (FOB) Point determines which partner controls the movement of funds 

- FOB Point and Constructive Receipt Days have been agreed to on the Order 

- FOB Source : the Servicing Agency initiates Settlement with Delivered/Performed transaction 

- FOB Destination : the Requesting Agency initiates Settlement with Received/Accepted transaction 

 

For additional information on Performance, Fiscal Service has published a G-Invoicing Program Guide for Basic 
Accounting and Reporting. The Program Guide defines the proper proprietary accounting treatment aligned to GInvoicing 
transaction steps. 

For a complete listing of current G-Invoicing Performance System Interface Specifications and Federal 
Intergovernmental Data Standards (FIDS), please visit here . 


Requesting Agency Performance Summary Page 

To access Performance within G-Invoicing: 

1. Click on the Requesting Agency drop-down menu. 

2. Click on Performance . 

The Performance Summary Page will appear. From this page, you should be able to access Performance based on 
the Roles and Groups that have been assigned to your G-Invoicing user account. Depending on the number of 
Performance any given agency has entered into the system, it may take a few moments for the Performance list to fully 
load. 



The information on the Performance Summary Page is organized into seven default columns that automatically display 
Performance that are in a Informational , Settled , or Pending status. To narrow/increase the amount of Performance that 
are visible on the summary page at any given time, to adjust how Performance are organized on the page, or to display 
additional columns, please see the Searching for Performance topic. 

- To clear the Performance Summary List of any filters you may have set, click on the Clear Filters button located near 
the top right portion of the page. 

 

Performance Summary List 

The following table describes the information displayed on the GT&C Summary List: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Performance# 

Click on any Performance # to view its details. 

 

Once a Performance is saved for the very first time, the 
system will auto-generate a Performance Number for the 
document. G-Invoicing auto-generates the Performance 
number in the format of P (literal), plus 4 digits for the 
current calendar year and month, plus 3 digits for the 
Requesting Agency ID, plus 3 digits for the Servicing Agency 
ID, plus 6 digits for a sequence number (which starts at 1 and 
increments for every new Performance). The sequence 
number restarts every MONTH at 1. 

 


Note : A paperclip icon immediately following a Performance# 
indicates that the Performance has one or more attachments 
added to it. 

 



Order# 

The Order number that the Performance was generated from. 

Performance Date 

The date on which the Performance originated. 

Transaction Date 

The date the Performance transaction was received by a 
system (e.g., G-Invoicing). 

Accounting Period 

The fiscal period that the transaction is reflected in the 
General Ledger, if applicable. 

Performance Type 

Identifies the nature of the Performance in the reported 
transaction 

Status 

The current status of the requested document. 

Inf ormational : if Performance does not trigger settlement. 

Pending : if settlement is currently pending. 

Settle : when settlement has occurred. 

Previously Settled : if funds already moved outside of GInvoicing. 


Deleted : if Performance was (logically) deleted. 

Error : if settlement failed. (If an Error status displays, please 
contact the Treasury Support Center for assistance.) 


Servicing Agency Performance Summary Page 

To access Performance within G-Invoicing: 

1. Click on the Servicing Agency drop-down menu. 

2. Click on Performance . (Alternatively, you may access the Performance List from inside any individual Order by 
clicking on the Options button near the top right portion of any Order page and selecting Performance List from the 
drop-down menu.) 

The Performance Summary Page will appear. From this page, you should be able to access Performance based on 
the Roles and Groups that have been assigned to your G-Invoicing user account. Depending on the number of 
Performance any given agency has entered into the system, it may take a few moments for the Performance list to fully 
load. 



The information on the Performance Summary Page is organized into seven default columns that automatically display 
Performance that are in a Informational , Settled , or Pending status. To narrow/increase the amount of Performance that 
are visible on the summary page at any given time, to adjust how Performance are organized on the page, or to display 
additional columns, please see the Searching for Performance topic. 

- To clear the Performance Summary List of any filters you may have set, click on the Clear Filters button located near 
the top right portion of the page. 

 

Performance Summary List 

The following table describes the information displayed on the GT&C Summary List: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Performance# 

Click on any Performance # to view its details. 

 

Once a Performance is saved for the very first time, the 
system will auto-generate a Performance Number for the 
document. G-Invoicing auto-generates the Performance 
number in the format of P (literal), plus 4 digits for the 
current calendar year and month, plus 3 digits for the 
Requesting Agency ID, plus 3 digits for the Servicing Agency 
ID, plus 6 digits for a sequence number (which starts at 1 and 
increments for every new Performance). The sequence 


number restarts every MONTH at 1. 

 

Note : A paperclip icon immediately following a Performance# 
indicates that the Performance has one or more attachments 
added to it. 

 



Order# 

The Order number that the Performance was generated from. 

Performance Date 

The date on which the Performance originated. 

Transaction Date 

The date the Performance transaction was received by a 
system (e.g., G-Invoicing). 

Accounting Period 

The fiscal period that the transaction is reflected in the 
General Ledger, if applicable. 

Performance Type 

Identifies the nature of the Performance in the reported 
transaction 

Status 

The current status of the requested document. 

Inf ormational : if Performance does not trigger settlement. 

Pending : if settlement is currently pending. 

Settle : when settlement has occurred. 

Previously Settled : if funds already moved outside of GInvoicing. 


Deleted : if Performance was (logically) deleted. 

Error : if settlement failed. (If an Error status displays, please 
contact the Treasury Support Center for assistance.) 


About Sending / Receiving Performance Between Agency ERPs 
and G-Invoicing 

For specific instructions on how to create and send Performance from an agency ERP to G-Invoicing (or how to pull 
Performance from G-Invoicing into an ERP), users should contact the ERP staff at their respective agencies directly. 


Searching for Performance 

Users may narrow or increase the items displayed on the Performance Summary Page and/or search for specific 
Performance by a number of ways. 

 

How to Search for Performance: 

 

1. Click on either the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menu. 

2. Click on Performance. The Performance Summary Page will display. Depending on the number of Performance 
any given agency has recorded in the system, it may take a few moments for the list of Performance to load on the 
Summary Page. 



 

 

- The information on the Performance Summary Page is organized into seven default columns that automatically display 
Performance that are in a Informational , Settled , or Pending status. 

 

- Performance numbers that have a paperclip icon displayed directly to the right of them indicate that one or more 
attachments have been uploaded to the Performance. 

 

- Performance numbers that have a minus (-) sign displayed directly to the right of them indicate that an Adjustment 
has been made to the Performance. 

 

3. Use the boxes beneath each Column name (Performance#, Order#, Status, etc.) to filter the Performance that 
appear on the page. For example, if you are searching for a single Performance number such as P2107-017-015- 
063304, you can just type in the number four (4) in the search field below the Performance# column name, and the 
system will display Performance that contain “4” in their numbers: 

 




 

Note : If you are entering a full Performance number into the Performance# search field, do not include the decimal 
point and any number that appears after it. Otherwise, the system will not find the Performance. 

- As soon as you have completed entering in the number you are searching for, the results should automatically display 
on the summary page. 

CRITICAL NOTE : As of G-Invoicing Release 4.2, Deferred Payments (DFRs) are handled differently by the system, 
and all DFRs that were created prior to Release 4.2 were moved to a Deleted status. To view these older DFRs, click on 
the drop-down menu for the Status column and select Deleted . 

 

 



 

 

- The Performance Type and Status columns include drop-down menus that allow you to filter on a specific 
Performance Type or Performance Status: 

 






 

- As mentioned above, the system automatically displays Performance that are in a Informational , Settled , or Pending 
status on the Performance Summary Page as a default. 

4. If you wish to narrow or increase the number of columns visible on the Performance Summary Page, click on the 
Selectable Columns box and select/deselect the columns you would like to add or remove from view: 

 




Note: If you decide to filter a Performance search based on a given column value and then decide to hide that column 
from the Performance Summary Page, the system will still retain the search filter, even though it may not be visible on 
the screen. For example, if you performed a Performance search based on a specific Order number, then decided to 
remove the Order # column from your view on the screen, the system will still display the Performance search results 
based on the specific Order number you have selected as filter. 

Additional items to keep in mind when filtering items on the Performance Summary Page: 

- The up and down arrows located to the right of the column names allow you to arrange the information that appears 
in the columns by alphanumerical order (A-to-Z/Z-to-A or lowest-to-highest/highest-to-lowest). 

- If you select one or more filters on the Performance Summary Page, move to another page within the system, then 
return to the Performance Summary Page within the same log in session, G-Invoicing will retain the filters selected on 
the Performance Summary List page. 

 

- To clear the Performance Summary List of any filters you may have set, click on the Clear Filters button located near 
the top right portion of the page. 

 

5. Click on the Performance Number to bring up the Performance Transaction Details page, which displays the 
associated Performance Header, Details, and Status information: 




 

- Clicking on the Order Number in the Performance Header section of the Performance Transaction Details page will 
take you to the actual Order the Performance was generated from. 

- To view Attachments to any Performance, click on the Attachments button located underneath the Status section. 

- To view an Audit History for the Performance, click on the Audit History button located underneath the Status 
section. 

 

- To Return to the Performance Summary page, click on the Return button located underneath the Status section. 


Viewing Performance Created From a Single Order 

You may view all of the Performance created off of a single Order from the Order itself. 

 

 

How to View Performance Created From a Single Order: 

 

1. Click on either the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus. 

2. Click on Orders . 

3. From the Orders Summary Page , locate an Order that you know has Performance generated off of it, and click on 
the Order# to open the Order. 

4. Click on the Show Performance button at the bottom of the page: 



 

5. Header information for that single Order will display at the top of page with the Line information located directly 
underneath it: 



 

- Hovering on the "i" icon to the right of Remaining Amount on the Header will display an explanation of how that 
figure is calculated based on the FOB point used on the order: 

 




 

 

If the FOB on an Order is Destination/Other , "Remaining quantity and amounts are being calculated from Receipt or 
Advance transactions" will display. 

 

If the FOB on an Order is Source, "Remaining quantity and amounts are being calculated from Delivered or Advance 
transactions" will display. 

 

 

- You may toggle the Order Header information on and off by clicking on the arrow to the left of the Order number 
near the top left portion of the page: 

 



 

- To view the Order Schedule Page for another Order, click on the Select an Order Number field to the right of the 
Order number, and select an Order Number from the drop-down menu. If needed, you may use the search bar 
located at the top of the Order Number drop-down menu to search for an Order Number. Please ensure that when 
searching for a full Order Number, you leave off the decimal point at the end of the Order Number and any number that 
displays after the decimal point. 

 



- To display the Schedules for each Line, click on the arrow to the left of each Line number in the Document Type 
column: 



 

 

- To display detailed information for any Line or Schedule number, click on any Line or Schedule number in the 


Document Type column. A Line Information box or a Schedule Information box will appear: 

 



 

 



 

 

- If any Performance has been generated off a Schedule, an arrow will appear to the left of the Schedule number in 
the Document Type column. Clicking on the arrow will display basic Performance information underneath its Schedule 
number: 

 

 



 

- Newly created Performance will display "New" to the right of its Document Type . 

 

- If Performance has been received by the Requesting Agency, click on the arrow to the left of Delivery to view the 
Receipt information. 

 


- Clicking on any Performance number in the Performance Number column will display the Performance 
Transaction Details page for that Performance: 

 

 



 

- Click on the Return button underneath the Status section of the Performance Transaction Details page to return to 
the previous page. 


Creating Performance 

Only Servicing Agencies may create Performance off of an Order. Please be aware of the following : 

- You can not Deliver on an Advance that is in the future. Advances must be settled before they can be Delivered. 

- You will not be allowed to create Performance off of a Schedule that uses an invalid/inactive Treasury Account Symbol 
(TAS). 

 

How to Create Performance for an Order: 

 

1. Log in to G-Invoicing, and from the Servicing Agency drop-down menu, click on Order . 

2. Locate an Order Number you would like to create Performance for and click on it to open the Order. 

3. After the Order opens, click on the Show Performance button at the bottom of the screen. The Order Schedule 
Balance (OSB) page will display: 



 

4. Select the arrow to the left of a Line number that you would like to create Performance for. The Schedule 
information for that Line will display: 



 

- Note : If the Order has existing Performance created for it, clicking on the arrow to the left of the Schedule number 
will display its previous Performance: 

 



 

 

 

5. From the Schedule number you would like to create an additional Performance for, click on the Create button 
under its Action column: 

 




 

 

6. The Create Performance box will appear: 

 

7. In the Type field, select a Performance Type from the drop-down menu (required): Advance , 
Delivered/Performed , or Deferred Payment . 

- Once a Performance Type is selected, the Date field becomes available. 

 

8. Click on the Date field. When the calendar box displays, select a Performance Date that falls between the start and 
end dates of the Order. 

- Note : If you future-date a Performance (i.e., if today is 2019-08-06, and you set the Performance Date as 2019-08- 
07), you will not be able to take any action on that Performance other than Delete it until 2019-08-07. 

- Once you select a date, the Accounting Period field becomes available. 

 

9. The Accounting Period field is required , and the current Accounting Period will appear as the default in the dropdown 
menu. Depending on the Type of Performance you are creating, you may be limited to the choice of Accounting 
Periods that display in the drop-down menu. For example: 


- On a Performance Type of Delivered/Performed, you will not be able to select an Accounting Period beyond the current 
month. 

- On a Performance Type of Advance, there is a limit to the amount of years that will be appear as selections. The 
system will not allow you to select an Accounting Period past 2028. 

- If you are creating Performance within 3 business days from the end of an Accounting Period/within 5 business days at 
the end of a calendar year, the previous and current Accounting Periods will be available to select in the drop-down 
menu. 

 

10. The Comments field (maximum of 1000 alphanumeric characters) and Agency Performance Identifier field 
(maximum of 50 alphanumeric characters) are both optiona l. Enter information into one or both of these fields, or skip 
to Step 11. 

11. Enter in a Quantity for each Line and Schedule, and select either Final or Partial from the Final field drop-down 
menu, if applicable (the Final/Partial drop-down menu is only available on Delivered/Performed Performance). 

Example of a Delivered/Performed Performance from an Order with a single Line and Schedule: 

 



 

 Example of an Advance Performance from an Order with multiple Lines and Schedules: 




12. Click on the Create button to generate the Performance. (Clicking on Cancel will return you to the Order Schedule 
Balance box.) 

13. A Success: Performance Added message will display. 


Working with Attachments to Performance 

Only users with the Requesting Performance Manager and Requesting Order Viewer or Servicing Performance Manager 
and Servicing Order Viewer roles assigned to them are able to add and delete attachments to Performance. Please be 
aware of the following rules when working with Performance attachments: 

- File name must be no more than 132 characters 

 

- The only allowable characters in attachment file names are: lower case letters (a-z), upper case letters (A-Z), 
numbers 0 through 9, dashes, and underscores (i.e., a file named PERFORMANCE 2018&2019_mipr$ is not acceptable, 
but a file named PERFORMANCE 2018_2019_mipr is) 

 

- File size cannot exceed 10MBs 

 

- The maximum number of attachments allowed per Performance is 25 

 

- Maximum size of all attachments combined per document is 250MB 

 

- File types of .zip, .rar, .cmd, .exe, .bat, and .scr are not allowed as attachments at this time 

 

- Requesting Agencies can view Servicing Agency attachments, but they cannot delete them 

 

- Servicing Agencies can view Requesting Agency attachments, but they cannot delete them 

 

- Attachments may only be added to a Performance after it has been created (i.e., you cannot add an attachment to a 
Performance while it is being drafted). 

 

The following file extensions/types are accepted by G-Invoicing: 

 

 

.doc 

word 

.docx 

word 

.xls 

excel 

.xlsx 

excel 

.xlsb 

excel 

.ppt 

powerpoint 

.pptx 

powerpoint 

.ppsx 

powerpoint 

.pps 

powerpoint 

.txt 

text 

.csv 

text 

.msg 

email 

.eml 

email 

.jpg 

image 

.gif 

image 

.png 

image 

.bmp 

image 

.pdf 

image 

.accdb 

ms database 

.mdb 

ms database 


 

 

 

How to Add Attachments to Performance: 

 

1. From the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menu, click on Performance. 

2. Locate a Performance Number you would like to add an attachment to and click on it. The Performance 
Transaction Details page will appear. 

3. Click on the Attachments button located just underneath the Status section. The Attachments box will appear: 



 

4. Click on the Add Attachment button. The Upload Attachment box will appear: 



 

5. Click on the Browse button. 

6. Select a file from your machine or local network, then click on the Open button. Your file and its size will appear 
directly above the Nickname field: 

 



 

7. Enter in a nickname for the attachment in the Nickname field (optional). 


8. Click on the Upload button. (Clicking on the Cancel button will remove the file you selected and returns you to the 
Browse function of the Upload Attachment box. Alternatively, you may also click on the small “X” to the right of the file 
name to cancel the upload and/or remove the file.) 

9. A Success: Attachment Added message will appear, and your file will appear in the Attachments box. 

10. Click on the “X” in the upper right-hand corner of the Attachments box to remove it from view. 

 

How to View an Attachment to a Performance: 

1. From the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menu, click on Performance. 

2. Locate a Performance Number you would like to add an attachment to and click on it. The Performance 
Transaction Details page will appear. 

3. Click on the Attachments button located just underneath the Status section. The Attachments box will appear. 

4. Locate the file you wish to view, and click on its File Name . 

5. Click on Open to view the file, Save to store the file on your machine or network , or Cancel to return to the list of 
Attachments. (Note : This may differ slightly depending on the internet browser being used.) 

 

 

 

How to an Delete Attachment to a Performance: 

1. From the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menu, click on Performance. 

2. Locate a Performance Number you would like to add an attachment to and click on it. The Performance 
Transaction Details page will appear. 

3. Click on the Attachments button located just underneath the Status section. The Attachments box will appear. 

4. Locate the file you would like to delete, and click on the garbage can icon for it in its Delete column. 

5. The Delete Attachment box will appear. Click on Yes to delete the file. (Clicking on No returns you to the 
Attachments box.) 


Taking Action on Performance 

Once created, a Requesting Agency may take action on Performance. 

Please note that you will not be able to create a Performance that is scheduled for a future date . For example, if today 
is 2021-06-01 and the Performance Date on the Performance is set to 2021-06-04, you will not be allowed to create a 
Reference Performance for it until 2021-06-04 or later. If you attempt to do so, you will be presented with an error 
message stating "Buyer cannot respond to a future-dated seller performance ". 

 

How to Take Action on Performance: 

 

1. From the Requesting Agency drop-down menu, click on Order . (Alternatively, you may click on Performance 
from the drop-down menu, locate the Performance# you would like to action on from the Performance Summary 
Page, click on its Order# , and skip to Step 3.) 

2. Locate the Order Number you would like to take action on the Performance for and click on it to open the Order. 

3. Click on the Show Performance button at the bottom of the Order page. The Order Schedule Balance (OSB) page 
will display: 



 

4. Click on the arrow to the left of the appropriate Line number to display the Schedule information for that Line: 



 

5. Click on the arrow to the left of the appropriate Schedule number to display the Delivery information for that 
Schedule: 

 



 

- Clicking on the arrow to the left of each Delivery will display information related to that Delivery (i.e., Adjustments 
made to it, Receipts , etc.) 

 

6. Locate the appropriate Delivery , and click on the Receive button in its Actions column. The Performance box will 
appear. 

7. The Type field in the Performance box will always display as Received/Accepted , and cannot be modified. The 
Agency Performance Identifier and Comments fields in the section at the top of the box are optional . 

8. Click on the Date field. When the calendar box appears, select the appropriate Performance Date . You may use the 


arrows near the top of the calendar box to skip ahead to a future month, or to go back to a previous month. You may 
also click on the Month and Year drop-down menus to select specific a month or year. Alternatively, you may enter a 
date by hand in the open field at the top of the calendar box using this format: yyyy-mm-dd . If you would like to 
select today's date, click on the Today button located in the lower left corner of the calendar box. To remove any 
calendar information you may have chosen, click on the Clear button in the lower right corner of the calendar box. 

 

- Once a Date is selected, the Accounting Period field becomes available. 

 

9. The Accounting Period field is required , and the current Accounting Period will appear as the default in the dropdown 
menu. Depending on the Type of Performance you are creating, you may be limited to the choice of Accounting 
Periods that display in the drop-down menu. For example: 

 

- On a Performance Type of Delivered/Performed, you will not be able to select an Accounting Period beyond the current 
month. 

- On a Performance Type of Advance, there is a limit to the amount of years that will be appear as selections. As of GInvoicing 
Release 4.2, the system will not allow you to select an Accounting Period past 2028. 

- If you are creating Performance within 3 business days from the end of an Accounting Period/within 5 business days at 
the end of a calendar year, the previous and current Accounting Periods will be available to select in the drop-down 
menu. 

 

10. In the Schedule section, enter in a Quantity , and select either Final or Partial from the Final field drop-down 
menu, if applicable (the Final/Partial drop-down menu is only available on Delivered/Performed Performance, and it is 
optional). 



11. Click on the Create button at the bottom of the box to generate the Performance. A Success: Performance 
Added message will display. (Clicking on Cancel will return you to the Performance Summary page). 

12. After Performance is created by the Requesting Agency, it will be displayed on the Performance Summary page and 
on the Order Schedule Balance* page for the Order. 

 

- Note : If you perform work on Performance that triggers an interaction with IPAC (i.e., if the FOB on an Order is 
Destination and you Receive a Performance for it), there may be a slight delay in the time it takes for the Adjust button 
to display in its Actions column on the Order Schedule Balance page and/or other information for the Performance to 
appear. If the Adjust button and/or other information for a Performance does not display on the Order Schedule Balance 
page after Receiving it, please try and refresh the page and/or move to another tab within G-Invoicing, and then move 
back to the desired Order Schedule Balance page. 


Working with Performance Business Rules Based on FOB Type 

There are rules that govern what actions can or cannot be taken on Performance based on the FOB Type entered into an 
Order. 

 

 

1) ORDERS with a FOB of SOURCE/ORIGIN: 

 

 

Performance Transaction: Delivered/Performed 

 

Performance Statuses : 

- Pending until Settled on non-advance schedule. 

- Informational when quantity is zero. 

- Informational on advance schedule. 

 

Accounting Period : 

- Accounting Period submitted with the transaction must be an open period. 

- Past Performance Date is acceptable, but use the Transaction Date to determine available Accounting Period(s). 

 

Zero Quantity : No 

 

Final Indicator : Yes 

 

Performance Date (Past) : Yes 

 

Performance Date (Future) : Can be future dated up to last day of current month. 

 

Adjustments : 

- Yes - Performance Date of an adjusting transaction may not precede the Performance Date of the adjusted 
transaction. 

- If non-advance schedule an adjustment would trigger Pending until Settled Status (i.e. would return money to the 
Requesting agency). 

 

Referencing Transaction : Yes - Adjustment of previous Delivered/Performed (that is not in the future) 

 

Delete : Yes 

 

 

 

Performance Transaction: Advance 

 

Performance Statuses : 

- Pending until Settled. 

 

Accounting Period : 

- Future Performance Date must fall within provided Accounting Period, which may not necessarily be an Open 
Accounting Period. 

- Past Performance Date is acceptable, but use the Transaction Date to determine available Accounting Period(s). 

 

Zero Quantity : No 

 

Final Indicator : No 

 

Performance Date (Past) : Yes 

 

Performance Date (Future) : Can be future dated up to September 2028 Accounting Period. 

 

Adjustments : 

- Yes - Performance Date of an adjusting transaction may not precede the Performance Date of the adjusted 
transaction. 

- Adjustment would trigger Pending until Settled Status (i.e., would return money to the Requesting agency) 

 

Referencing Transaction : Yes - Adjustment of previous Advance (that is not in the future). 

 

Delete : Yes - If Performance Date is in the future. 

 


 

 

Performance Transaction: Deferred Payment 

 

Performance Statuses : Informational 

 

Accounting Period : Accounting Period submitted with the transaction must be an open period. 

 

Zero Quantity : Yes 

 

Final Indicator : No 

 

Performance Date (Past) : Yes 

 

Performance Date (Future) : No 

 

Adjustments : No 

 

Referencing Transaction : No 

 

Delete : May post additional Deferred Payment within same Accounting Period to override existing Deferred Payment 
(not a true delete, but G-Invoicing will mark previous Deferred Payment as deleted). 

 

 

 

Performance Transaction: Received/Accepted 

 

Performance Statuses : Informational 

 

Accounting Period : 

- Accounting Period submitted with the transaction must be an open period. 

- Past Performance Date is acceptable, but use the Transaction Date to determine available Accounting Period(s). 

 

Zero Quantity : Yes 

 

Final Indicator : No 

 

Performance Date (Past) : Yes 

 

Performance Date (Future) : No 

 

Adjustments : Yes - Performance Date of an adjusting transaction may not precede the Performance Date of the 
adjusted transaction. 

 

Referencing Transaction : 

- Yes: Adjustment of previous Received/Accepted 

- Must always reference a previous positive Delivered/Performed. 

- May reference a Delivered/Performed with a Received/Accepted Performance Date that is prior to the 
Delivered/Performed Performance Date. 

- Received/Accepted is not required when FOB is Source, or when conducted against an Advanced Performance type 
(whether FOB is Source or Destination) . However, it is conditional: if Received/Accepted is selected on any part of a 
Schedule, it becomes required for every Delivered/Performed transaction on that particular Schedule. 

 

Delete : No. 

 

 

Other items of note for FOB Source/Origin : 

 

- Delivered/Performed is required in every case (by Servicing Agency) 

- Advance followed by Delivered/Performed for Liquidation 

- Deferred Payment is followed by Delivered/Performed (to Collect on Work in Progress) 

- CRITICAL NOTE : Delivered/Performed on Schedules that are a mix of Advanced and Non-Advanced cannot be 
reported in a single Performance transaction as the Settlement status on the Performance Header can only display a 
single value; separate Performance transactions must be created for the Advanced and Non-Advanced items 


 

 

 

2) ORDERS with a FOB of DESTINATION or OTHER 

 

 

Performance Transaction: Delivered/Performed 

 

Performance Statuses : Informational 

 

Accounting Period : 

- Accounting Period submitted with the transaction must be an open period. 

- Past Performance Date is acceptable, but use the Transaction Date to determine available Accounting Period(s). 

 

Zero Quantity : Yes 

 

Final Indicator : Yes 

 

Performance Date (Past) : Yes 

 

Performance Date (Future) : Can be future dated up to last day of current month. 

 

Adjustments : Yes - Performance Date of an adjusting transaction may not precede the Performance Date of the 
adjusted transaction. 

 

Referencing Transaction : Yes - Adjustment of previous Delivered/Performed (that is not in the future) 

 

Delete : If Performance Date is in the future. 

 

 

 

Performance Transaction: Advance 

 

Performance Statuses : 

- Pending until Settled. 

 

Accounting Period : 

- Future Performance Date must fall within provided Accounting Period, which may not necessarily be an Open 
Accounting Period. 

- Past Performance Date is acceptable, but use the Transaction Date to determine available Accounting Period(s). 

 

Zero Quantity : No 

 

Final Indicator : No 

 

Performance Date (Past) : Yes 

 

Performance Date (Future) : Can be future dated up to September 2028 Accounting Period. 

 

Adjustments : 

- Yes - Performance Date of an adjusting transaction may not precede the Performance Date of the adjusted 
transaction. 

- Adjustment would trigger Pending until Settled Status (i.e., would return money to the Requesting agency). 

 

Referencing Transaction : Yes - Adjustment of previous Advance (that is not in the future). 

 

Delete : Yes - If Performance Date is in the future. 

 

 

 

Performance Transaction: Deferred Payment 

 

Performance Statuses : Informational 

 

Accounting Period : Accounting Period submitted with the transaction must be an open period. 

 

Zero Quantity : Yes 

 


Final Indicator : No 

 

Performance Date (Past) : Yes 

 

Performance Date (Future) : No 

 

Adjustments : No 

 

Referencing Transaction : No 

 

Delete : May post additional Deferred Payment within same Accounting Period to override existing Deferred Payment 
(not a true delete, but G-Invoicing will mark previous Deferred Payment as deleted). 

 

 

 

Performance Transaction: Received/Accepted 

 

Performance Statuses : 

- Pending until Settled on non-advance schedule. 

- Informational when quantity is zero. 

- Informational on advance schedule. 

 

Accounting Period : 

- Accounting Period submitted with the transaction must be an open period. 

- Past Performance Date is acceptable, but use the Transaction Date to determine available Accounting Period(s). 

 

Zero Quantity : Yes 

 

Final Indicator : No 

 

Performance Date (Past) : Yes 

 

Performance Date (Future) : No 

 

Adjustments : 

- Yes - Performance Date of an adjusting transaction may not precede the Performance Date of the adjusted 
transaction. 

- If non-advance schedule an adjustment would trigger Pending until Settled Status (i.e., would return money to the 
Requesting agency). 

 

Referencing Transaction : 

- Yes- Adjustment of previous Received/Accepted. 

- Must always reference a previous positive Delivered/Performed. 

- May reference a Delivered/Performed with a Received/Accepted Performance Date that is prior to the 
Delivered/Performed Performance Date. 

 

Delete : No. 

 

 

Other items of note for FOB Destination or Other : 

 

- Delivered/Performed by Seller is followed by Received/Accepted by Buyer 

- Constructive Receipt enforced by G-Invoicing after ‘n’ days. Note : Number of days (‘n’) is negotiated on the Order. 

- Optional for FOB Source and/or Advance Payment Indicator is Yes 


Adjustments to Performance 

When a correction to a Performance is required, an Adjustment may be made to it. Please be aware of the following: 

- An Adjustment must reference a previous Performance 

- Adjustments to Performance are made by entering negative quantity amounts 

- FOB Point determines which trading partner adjustments initiate Settlement 

Note: If work is performed on Performance that triggers an interaction with IPAC (i.e., if the FOB on an Order is 
Destination and a Requesting Agency Receives a Performance for it), there may be a slight delay in the time it takes for 
the Adjust button to display in its Actions column on the Order Schedule Balance page. If the Adjust button for a 
Performance does not immediately display on the Order Schedule Balance, please try and refresh the page and/or move 
to another tab within G-Invoicing, and then move back to the desired Order Schedule Balance page. 

 

 

How to Make an Adjustment to Performance: 

 

Example #1 : A Servicing Agency created a Performance with a Quantity of 10 items, when the amount actually needed 
to be 5. 

1. From the Serving Agency drop-down menu, click on Order . (Alternatively, you may click on Performance from the 
drop-down menu, locate the Performance# you would like to action on from the Performance Summary Page, click on 
its Order# , and skip to Step 3.) 

2. Locate the Order# you would like to Adjust Performance for, and click on it to open the Order. 

3. Click on the Show Performance button at the bottom of the page. The Order Schedule Balance (OSB) page will 
display: 



4. Click on the arrow to the left of the appropriate Line number to display the Schedule information for that Line: 



5. Click on the arrow to the left of the appropriate Schedule number to display the Delivery information for that 
Schedule: 

 




 

- Clicking on the arrow to the left of each Delivery will display information related to that Delivery (i.e., Adjustments 
made to it, Receipts, etc.) 

 

6. Locate the appropriate Delivery, and click on the Adjust button in its Actions column. The Performance box will 
appear. 

 

7. The Type field will automatically be filled in. 

8. The Agency Performance Identifier and Comments fields are optional . 

9. Select a Date for the Adjustment Performance. Once you select a Date, the Accounting Period field becomes 
available. 

 

10. The Accounting Period field is required , and the current Accounting Period will appear as the default in the dropdown 
menu. Depending on the Type of Performance you are adjusting, you may be limited to the choice of Accounting 
Periods that display in the drop-down menu. For example: 

 

- On a Performance Type of Delivered/Performed, you will not be able to select an Accounting Period beyond the current 
month. 

- On a Performance Type of Advance, there is a limit to the amount of years that will be appear as selections. As of GInvoicing 
Release 4.2, the system will not allow you to select an Accounting Period past 2028. 

- If you are creating Performance within 3 business days from the end of an Accounting Period/within 5 business days at 
the end of a calendar year, the previous and current Accounting Periods will be available to select in the drop-down 
menu. 

 

11. In the Quantity field, enter the amount you would like to adjust. In this case, a -5 was entered to lower the 
amount. 




12. Select either Final or Partial from the Final field drop-down menu, if applicable (the Final/Partial drop-down menu 
is only available on Delivered/Performed Performance, and it is optional). 

13. Click on the Create button at the bottom of the Performance box to generate the Adjustment. (Clicking on Cancel 
returns you to the previous page.) 

14. The Adjustment will display under the Delivery information for that Schedule on the Order Schedule Balance page. A 
minus sign (-) will display to the right of the Document Type followed by "New". 



 

 

Example #2 : A Requesting Agency stated that they received all 7 items on a Performance when they actually 
received 5. 

1. From the Requesting Agency drop-down menu, click on Order . (Alternatively, you may click on Performance 
from the drop-down menu, locate the Performance# you would like to action on from the Performance Summary 
Page, click on its Order# , and skip to Step 3.) 

2. Locate the Order# you would like to Adjust Performance for, and click on it to open the Order. 

3. Click on the Show Performance button at the bottom of the page. The Order Schedule Balance (OSB) page will 
display: 




4. Click on the arrow to the left of the appropriate Line number to display the Schedule information for that Line: 



 

 

5. Click on the arrow to the left of the appropriate Schedule number to display the Delivery information for that 
Schedule: 

 



 

6. Click on the arrow to the left of the appropriate Delivery to display its Receipt information: 

 



 

7. From the Receipt, click on the Adjust button in its Actions column. The Performance box will appear. 

 

8. The Type field will automatically be filled in. 

 

9. The Agency Performance Identifier and Comments fields are optional . 

 

10. The Accounting Period field is required , and the current Accounting Period will appear as the default in the dropdown 
menu. Depending on the Type of Performance you are creating, you may be limited to the choice of Accounting 
Periods that display in the drop-down menu. For example: 

 

- On a Performance Type of Delivered/Performed, you will not be able to select an Accounting Period beyond the current 
month. 

- On a Performance Type of Advance, there is a limit to the amount of years that will be appear as selections. As of GInvoicing 
Release 4.2, the system will not allow you to select an Accounting Period past 2028. 

- If you are creating Performance within 3 business days from the end of an Accounting Period/within 5 business days at 
the end of a calendar year, the previous and current Accounting Periods will be available to select in the drop-down 
menu. 

 

11. In the Quantity field, enter the amount you would like to adjust. In this case, a -2 was entered to lower the 
amount: 

 




 

12. Click on the Create button at the bottom of the Performance box to generate the Adjustment. (Clicking on Cancel 
returns you to the previous page.) 

13. The Adjustment will display under the Delivery and Receipt information for that Schedule on the Order Schedule 
Balance page. A minus sign (-) will display to the right of the Document Type followed by "New". 




Viewing a Performance Audit History 

1. From either the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency drop-down menus, click on Performance . 

 

2. Locate a Performance that you would like to view the Audit History for, and click on its Performance# . The 
Performance Transaction Details page will display. 

 

3. Click on the Audit History button located just underneath the Status section. The Audit History box will display: 

 



 

 

The Performance Audit History displays the following information: 

 

Field Name 

Description 

Date 

Date of the action 

Action 

Type of action taken (i.e., Performance Created or Performance 
Updated) 

User 

The User ID of the user who performed the associated action 

Comment 

A brief explanation of the action taken on the Performance 

 

 

4. To return to the Performance, click on the “X” in the top right corner of the Audit History box. 


Viewing Performance Settlement Status 

The Settlement status of a Performance may be viewed from the Performance Summary page or from within the 
Performance itself if you need additional status information. Please be advised that not all actions taken on a 
Performance trigger Settlement. For a list of Rules that govern the status of various Performance types, please visit 
here . 

 

How to View a Performance Settlement Status: 

 

1. From the Requesting Agency or Serving Agency drop-down menus, click on Performance . The Performance 
Summary page will display. 

2. Locate the Performance number you would like to view the status on, and look in its Status column. (Note : Please 
keep in mind that the Performance Summary page only lists Performance in a status of Informational , Settled , and 
Pending as a default. If you cannot locate a Performance number, please click on one or more additional statuses from 
the Status column.) 

3. For additional status information, click on a Performance# to open it. The Performance Transaction Details page 
will display. 

4. View the information presented in the Status section of the Performance: 

 



 

The Status that may display for any given Performance: 

- Pre-Performance (PRE) : For any Performance reported prior to the availability of the Settlement feature in GInvoicing 
(Release 3.0) 

- Informational (INF) : The Performance does not trigger Settlement 

- Pending (PND) : A Performance that triggers Settlement, but has not yet been settled via IPAC (this includes 
Performance that is future-dated) 

- Settled (STL) : The Performance has been settled via IPAC 

- Deleted (XXX) : A future Performance has been deleted by a user 

- Previously Settled (PRE) : If funds have already been moved outside of G-Invoicing. 

 

- Error (ERR): The Settlement of a Performance has failed. In the event of an Error, please contact the Treasury 
Support Center for assistance. 


 

Deleting Performance 

Only Servicing Agencies may delete an existing Performance. 

Please note that a Performance may only be deleted if it is future-dated* . For example, if you are working in the 
system as a Servicing Agency on 2019-08- 06, and want to delete a Performance that has a Performance date of 2019- 
08- 07, you may do so. You would not be able to delete a Performance with a date of 2019-08-06 or earlier. 

Corrections to existing Performance that are not future-dated may be made through the Adjustments process. 

*Performance is a calendar date, not a fiscal date. 

 

 

How to Delete Performance: 

 

1. From the Servicing Agency drop-down menu, click on Order . 

2. From the Orders Summary Page , locate an Order that you would like to delete the Performance for, and click on 
the Order# to open it. 

3. Click on the Show Performance button located at the bottom of the screen. The Order Schedule Balance page 
will display. 

4. Click on the arrow to the left of the appropriate Line number . 

5. Click on the arrow to the left of the appropriate Schedule number. 

 

6. Locate the item you wish to Delete and click on the Delete button in its Action column: 

 



 

7. Click on Yes to delete the Performance. (Clicking on No returns you to the Performance itself.) 

8. A Success: Successfully Removed Performance PXXXX-XXX-XXX-XXXXXX message will display, and the 
Performance will be removed from view from the Performance Summary Page if you do not have Deleted selected as a 
filter in the Status column. 


Exporting Performance Information to a .CSV File 

Performance information may be exported from G-Invoicing to a .csv file. 

Please be aware that the Performance export function will only return results based on any/all filters you may have 
selected on the Performance Summary page. For example, as a Servicing Agency, if you have selected only to display 
details for Performance number P1907-020-020-000039, and you click on the Export Details button, the .csv file will 
only contain details for that one Performance. If no filters have been selected, the .csv file will show a list of all 
Performance numbers without Adjustments or Performance that has been Deleted (see below for instructions on how to 
include Adjustments and Deleted Performance to your export). 

Note : As of G-Invoicing Release 4.3, the maximum amount of Performance that can display in an Export Details 
export is 20,000 . If you attempt to generate an export with more than 20,000 documents, the system will display a 
20,000 line limit error message. If you receive the error message, please attempt to narrow down the search results on 
your Summary Page by using filters (i.e., display documents by Performance Date, Accounting Period, Status, etc.), 
then running separate reports. Once the separate exports have been run, you may consolidate them into a single file if 
you wish. In addition, the Performance export includes Header and Details information: if a Performance contains 
multiple Schedules on it*, they will count against the 20,000 item export limit. 

*Please be aware that the number of Performance that is exported may not exactly match the number of Performance 
displayed on your Performance Summary List. This is due to the fact that the Performance Summary List does not 
display individual Schedule information. 

 

For advanced Performance reporting features available in G-Invoicing, please click here . 

 

 

How to Export Performance Information: 

 

1. Log in to G-Invoicing, and click on Performance from either the Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency dropdown 
menus. 

2. If you need to export Performance based on information that is not already set as a default on the Performance 
Summary Page, set the appropriate filters. Otherwise, proceed to step 3. 

3. Click on the Export Details button located near the top right portion of the Performance Summary page: 



 


4. When the file export box appears at the bottom of the page, click on Open to immediately view the file, or click on 
Save to place the file on your machine or your local network. (Clicking on Cancel will remove the file export box from 
view.) 

 

 

Please be aware that the Performance Status in the export will display as a three letter code: 

 

- Pre-Performance (PRE) : For any Performance reported prior to the availability of the Settlement feature in GInvoicing 
(Release 3.0) 

- Informational (INF) : The Performance does not trigger Settlement 

- Pending (PND) : A Performance that triggers Settlement, but has not yet been settled via IPAC (this includes 
Performance that is future-dated) 

- Settled (STL) : The Performance has been settled via IPAC 

- Deleted (XXX) : A future Performance has been deleted by a user 

- Previously Settled (PRE) : If funds have already been moved outside of G-Invoicing. 

 

- Error (ERR): The Settlement of a Performance has failed. In the event of an Error, please contact the Treasury 
Support Center for assistance. 


Reports 

The Reports link near the top of each page in G-Invoicing will be visible to all users. However, only Performancerelated 
reports are available to run at this time, and only users who hold Performance-related Roles in their user 
accounts will have access to the current Performance reporting functionality within the Reports section. Reporting 
functionality will be available for other documents (GT&Cs and Orders) within the Reports section in future G-Invoicing 
releases. 

 

The Reports section in G-Invoicing provides a more advanced reporting capability than what is offered from the Export 
Summary and Export Details options available on the document Summary List pages. 

 

 

How To Run a Performance Report From the Reports Section : 

 

1. Log in to G-Invoicing. 

2. Click on Reports near the top left portion of the page. The Reports page will display: 

 



 

3. In the Reports section: 

 

- The Report field will display Performance as a default due to the fact that the advanced reporting function is only 
available for Performance at this time. You will not be able to update this field. 

- In the Partner Indicator field, select either Requesting Agency or Servicing Agency (required) 

 

4. The fields in the Reports Filter section are optional, and may be used to narrow down report results: 

 

- Accounting Period(s) : From the drop-down menu, select one or more Reporting Periods 

- Performance Type(s) : From the drop-down menu, select one or more Performance Types 

- Date Type : Select an appropriate Date Type (Performance Date, Transaction Date, or Transfer Date) 

- Start Date : Select the beginning date of a date range you would like the report to pull from. Clicking in the Start Date 
field will bring up a calendar box where you may select a Start Date. 

- End Date : Select the end date of a date range you would like the report to pull from. Clicking in the End Date field 
will bring up a calendar box where you may select an End Date. 

- Order Number : Select a specific Order Number from the drop-down menu to generate a report from. You may scroll 
through a list of available Order Numbers, or you may search for a specific Order Number from the search bar located at 
the top of the Order Number list. Please note the Order Numbers that display here will be limited to Orders in an Open 
or Closed status, and Modified Orders that are in a Draft or Pending Approval status. 

- Performance Status(es) : Select one or more Performance Statuses 

 

5. Click on the Run Report button underneath the Reports Filters section to generate the report. Depending on your 
internet browser, a box should appear at either the top or bottom of the page where the .csv file containing your report 
results can be opened and/or saved to your machine or a local network. Please be aware that your report may take 


some time to generate based on the number of documents that will be included in the report. 

 

- At this time, the maximum number of Performance Details that can be displayed in a single report is 20,000 . If your 
report exceeds that limit, you will be presented with the following message: 

 



 

- If you run a Report and there are no Performance Details that match your filtering criteria, you will be presented with 
the following message: 

 



 

All completed fields or filters you may have selected may be cleared out at any time by clicking on the Reset button 
located beneath the Reports Filters section. 


Glossary 

Agency Account : A data partition, created and managed centrally, to which agency administrative users are assigned 
for the purpose of managing users and access to documents (de-centrally). 

Agency Administrators : Generic term referring to any user within G-Invoicing that holds one or more administrator 
roles/permissions within their agency. 

Agency Location Code (ALC) : An ALC is a unique identifier created by the government, and is used by G-Invoicing as 
a specific identifier that is assigned to an agency who receives goods or services from another agency. 

Central Administrators : United States Department of the Treasury Bureau of the Fiscal Service or Federal Reserve 
Bank-St. Louis staff members that administer G-Invoicing through the Central Administration portion of the system. 

Document : Within G-Invoicing, the term "document" may refer to a GT&C, Order, or Performance. 

ISIM : The United States Department of the Treasury IBM Identity Security Manager. ISIM is used to manage Treasury 
SSO (Single Sign-On) accounts and grant access to the United States Department of the Treasury applications, 
including G-Invoicing. 

Organization Groups : Logical entities within G-Invoicing that largely determine which documents users have access to 
within G-Invoicing. 

Roles : A collection of G-Invoicing feature permissions assigned to a user account. They are used to control user data 
access to documents, and often have Groups assigned to them. 

Single Sign-On (SSO) Account: A separate United States Department of the Treasury user account that allows users 
to log in to one or more United States Department of the Treasury applications using a single User ID and password. 
SSO accounts are administered through the United States Department of the Treasury Self-Service system, and are not 
supported by the G-Invoicing Support Team. For assistance with SSO accounts, users may contact the United States 
Department of the Treasury Bureau of the Fiscal Service IT Service Desk directly at (304) 480-7777. Please note that 
this service desk is a different entity than the Treasury Support Center (TSC): if you contact the TSC for SSO issues, 
they will not be able to assist you. 

TAS Filter : A filter applied to an Organization Group that may narrow a user's access to a G-Invoicing document based 
on a Treasury Account Symbol (TAS). A TAS Filter is comprised of four TAS components: 

- Allocation Transfer Agency Identifier (ATA): The Agency Identifier of the agency receiving funds through an allocation 
transfer. Size: 3 Numeric Characters 

- Agency Identifier (AID): Agency Identifier of account owner. Used in conjunction with the main account code, the 
Agency Identifier represents the department, agency, or establishment of the U.S. Government that is responsible for 
the TAS. Size: 3 Numeric Characters 

- Main Account Code (MAIN): Identifies the type and purpose of the fund. Size: 4 Alphanumeric Characters 

- Sub-Account Code (SUB): Identifies an available receipt or other United States Department of the Treasury-defined 
subdivision of the main account. Size: 3 Numeric Characters 

 


Overview of Troubleshooting & Known Issues 

The items contained in this section include troubleshooting tips that may not fall easily into one or more of the other 
online help topics, and/or include descriptions of known issues. 

 

 


Issues When Using Internet Explorer 11 (GINV-7871) 

Using Internet Explorer 11 to access G-Invoicing may cause inconsistent results such as elements not working, 
selectable buttons not responding, calendar widgets not functioning. For the best user experience, it is recommended to 
use Microsoft Edge, Google Chrome, or Mozilla Firefox. Microsoft is moving away from Internet Explorer 11 and 
recommends Microsoft Edge as their preferred browser. 


G-Invoicing Requesting or Servicing Agency Summary Page 
View Issues (GINV-4535) 

As of G-Invoicing Release 3.0, users may experience an issue in Internet Explorer (IE) whereby their GT&C, Orders, or 
Performance Summary Pages appear as a blank white space beneath the various tabs located at the top of the page if 
United States Department of the Treasury-related URLs are entered into the Compatibility View Settings in IE. This issue 
can be resolved easily by using another internet browser such as Chrome or Firefox. If users must use IE to log in to GInvoicing, 
please follow the instructions below. 

 

How to Adjust the IE Compatibility View Settings 

 

1. Log out of G-Invoicing. 

2. Select Help from the Internet Explorer menu bar, and click on About Internet Explorer to verify your current 
version of IE (while this may happen in multiple IE versions, it most commonly affects IE 11): 

 



 

3. Select Tools from the Internet Explorer menu bar: 

 



 

4. Click on Compatibility View settings . 

 




 

5. If any United States Department of the Treasury-related URLs appear (i.e., treas.gov or treasury.gov) in the 
"Websites you've added to Compatibility View " box, copy them to a separate document and save them; you will 
need the URLs in the event you have troubles reaching the G-Invoicing login page or any other United States 
Department of the Treasury applications. If you do experience issues with other applications after removing the URLs, 
you will need to contact your local IT Department directly for assistance. 

 

6. Select Remove for each of the URLs listed. 

 

7. Uncheck the Display intranet sites in Compatibility View setting. 

 

8. Click on the Close button. 

 




 

9. Clear the cache on IE. 

 

10. Log back into G-Invoicing. 

 

Again, if you are able to use either Chrome and/or Firefox, you should be able to see the Summary Pages without any 
issues. Please be aware that, if the Summary Page loads just fine, and you can see the layout of the Summary Pages 
with all of the columns displayed but no GT&Cs/Orders/Performance appear, it is normally due to a user account 
permissions issue, and you should contact one of your agency’s G-Invoicing User Administrators for further assistance. 

Note: If the Display intranet sites in Compatibility View check box reappears after a reboot, you will need to 
contact your IT Department for additional assistance. There may be workstation security policies enforcing this setting, 
and your IT Department should be able to assist you. 


Contact Us 

If you should require technical support, please contact us either by phone or email. The G-Invoicing Customer Support 
Team is available during standard operating hours, 8:00 AM to 6:00 PM Eastern Standard Time (EST), Monday through 
Friday (except Federal holidays). 

 

By Phone 

1-877-440-9476 

By Email 

GInvoicing@stls.frb.org 

 

 

General information regarding the G-Invoicing program can be found on the Bureau of the Fiscal Service website at: GInvoicing 
Home Page 

 

 

For United States Department of the Treasury Single Sign-On Account issues, users should contact the Treasury 
Support Center at 1-877-440-9476. 


Release Version History 

Detailed notes on the most recent G-Invoicing release may be viewed by logging into the system, clicking on the Help 
link near the top right portion of the page, and selecting Agency Release Notes from the drop-down menu. Once 
selected, the Agency Release Notes may be opened and/or downloaded and saved as a .pdf file. 

 

Date 

Release Version 

Release Overview (News & Information Items) 

03/03/22 

R4.4 

1) GT&C Workflow by Org Group 2) Continue improving user API efficiencies 
3) Undelivered Balance enhancements 4) More efficient GT&C Summary List 
page 5) New report Menu and Performance report 6) New Supervisor roles 

09/16/21 

R4.3 

1) GT&C Shared Draft workflow 2) Enhanced Performance User Experience 3) 
Remittance API 4) Ability to change User Administrators assigned to users to 
aid with “User Recertification” 5) Other bug fixes (Deploy 9/16/21) 

12/20/21 

R4.3.2 

1) Remediate security vulnerabilities (Deploy 12/20/21) 

11/04/21 

R4.3.1 

1) Bug fixes (Deploy 11/04/21) 

07/08/21 

R4.2.1 

1) Correct Workflow defect (Deploy 7/8/21) 

06/30/21 

R4.2 

1) Workflow Configuration and routing 2) Workflow Configuration security 3) 
Enhancements to Users, Orders and Performance modules 4) Fixed minor 
defects in Orders and Performance 5) Improved accessibility (508 
Compliance) (Deploy 6/30/21) 

03/30/21 

R4.1 

1) Seller Facilitated Orders (SFO) 2) Ability to assign Subordinate Groups & 
select Document Inherence Indicator (DII) on GT&Cs 3)Enhanced Org Tree 
option for Group Name & Description in GT&C details - Expand/Collapse All 
buttons added 4) Other bug fixes (Deploy 3/30/21) 

01/21/21 

R4.0.1 

1) GT&C to Groups mapping changes 2) Enforce uniqueness in data 
tables/address post-migration duplicate data issues 3) GT&C validation for 
long string fields 4) Other bug fixes 5) Fiscal Service Accounts (Deploy 
1/21/21) 

12/03/20 

R4.0 

1) Implementation of new Organization Model 2) Updated Administrator 
Roles: Master Administrator, User Administrator, Organization Administrator 
3) New Agency Account Module; Combines legacy “Disburser” and “Admin” 
Modules 4) Improved Agency Account administration for Central 
Administrators (Deploy 12/3/20) 

09/24/20 

R3.3.4 

1) Database update (Deploy 9/24/20) 

08/28/20 

R3.3.3 

1) Adjusted agency ALC load times on new GT&Cs (Deploy 8/28/20) 

08/05/20 

R3.3.2 

1) Correct Reference Data Renaming Issue 2) Correct New User Create Issue 
(Deploy 8/5/20) 

07/07/20 

R3.3.1 

1) Enhance GINV user create-Modify process to circumvent ISIM duplicate 
user issue 2) Implement GT&C last update change 3) Allow GT&C Creator 
Role to add/remove attachments (Deploy 7/7/20) 

05/18/20 

R3.3 

1) Introducing Organizational Groups 2) Allow trading partner to return GT&C 
last update change 3) Implement 12 Order data standard changes 4) User 
Guides can be downloaded from within the application 5) Support multiple 
BETCs 5) Order FIDS changes 6) Correct handling of GINV start/end date 
values 7) Front end to allow Org Admins to point SDAGs to Groups 8) Create 
and Manage Organizational Structure (Deploy 5/18/20) 

04/09/20 

R3.2 

1) New "Disburser Module" 2) New "Disburser Administrator" role granting 
access for Group Management and User Management 3) New "Organization 
Groups" to manage Groups and grant permissions to documents 4) Disburser 
Module will only allow "Lines" and "Schedules" on Orders to be cancelled or 
restored once they are Saved (deploy 4/9/20) 

02/10/20 

R3.1.1 

1) Adjusted "and/or" logic on User Access Model 2) Corrected Print Error on 
Requesting Agency Final Approver Signature Field (Deploy 2/10/20) 

 


Document Revision History 

 

 

Date 

Release 
Version 

Changes 

03/03/22 

R4.4 

Document updates related to release-specific functionality and changes 

12/20/21 

R4.3.2 

No changes necessary 

11/04/21 

R4.3.1 

No changes necessary 

09/16/21 

R4.3 

Document updates related to release-specific functionality and changes 

07/08/21 

R4.2.1 

No changes necessary 

06/30/21 

R4.2 

Document updates related to release-specific functionality and changes 

03/30/21 

R4.1 

Document updates related to release-specific functionality and changes 

01/21/21 

R4.0.1 

Document updates related to release-specific functionality and changes 

10/08/20 

R4.0 

Document updates related to release-specific functionality and changes 

09/24/20 

R3.3.4 

No changes necessary 

08/28/20 

R3.3.3 

No changes necessary 

08/05/20 

R3.3.2 

No changes necessary 

07/07/20 

R3.3.1 

No changes necessary 

05/18/20 

R3.3 

Document updates related to release-specific functionality and changes 

04/07/20 

R3.2 

Document updates related to release-specific functionality and changes 

 

 


