GOVERNMENT 
AUDITING 
STANDARDS 

2018 Revision 

Technical Update April 2021 

 

 

 


 
By the Comptroller General of the 
United States 

April 2021 

 

GAO-21-368G 

 

 

United States Government Accountability Office 






GOVERNMENT 
AUDITING 
STANDARDS 
2018 RevisionTechnical Update April 2021









By the Comptroller General of the 
United States 

April 2021 



GAO-21-368G 





United States Government Accountability Office 

The 2018 revision of Government Auditing Standards is effective for 
financial audits, attestation engagements, and reviews of financial 
statements for periods ending on or after June 30, 2020, and for 
performance audits beginning on or after July 1, 2019. Early 
implementation is not permitted. The 2018 revision of Government 
Auditing Standards supersedes the 2011 revision (GAO-12-331G, 
December 2011), the 2005 Government Auditing Standards: Guidance 
on GAGAS Requirements for Continuing Professional Education 
(GAO-05-568G, April 2005), and the 2014 Government Auditing 
Standards: Guidance for Understanding the New Peer Review Ratings 
(D06602, January 2014). The 2018 revision should be used until 
further updates and revisions are made. An electronic version of this 
document can be accessed on GAO’s Yellow Book web page at 
http://www.gao.gov/yellowbook. 




2021 Technical 
Updates to the 2018 
Revision of 
Government Auditing 
Standards 




The following technical updates have been made to the 2018 revision of 
Government Auditing Standards (known as the Yellow Book). These 
technical updates to the 2018 revision of Government Auditing 
Standards are effective upon issuance. 

 

 

2018 Revision of Government Auditing Standards 

2021 Technical Updates 

1.02 The concept of accountability for use of public resources and 
government authority is key to our nation’s governing processes. 
Management and officials entrusted with public resources are 
responsible for carrying out public functions and providing service 
to the public effectively, efficiently, economically, and ethically 
within the context of the statutory boundaries of the specific 
government program. 

1.02 The concept of accountability for use of public resources and 
government authority is key to our nation’s governing processes. 
Management and officials entrusted with public resources are 
responsible for carrying out public functions and providing service 
to the public effectively, efficiently, economically, ethically, and 
equitably within the context of the statutory boundaries of the 
specific government program. 

 

1.03 As reflected in applicable laws, regulations, agreements, and 
standards, management and officials of government programs are 
responsible for providing reliable, useful, and timely information 
for transparency and accountability of these programs and their 
operations. Legislators, oversight bodies, those charged with 
governance, and the public need to know whether (1) 
management and officials manage government resources and use 
their authority properly and in compliance with laws and 
regulations; (2) government programs are achieving their 
objectives and desired outcomes; and (3) government services 
are provided effectively, efficiently, economically, and ethically. 

1.03 As reflected in applicable laws, regulations, agreements, and 
standards, management and officials of government programs are 
responsible for providing reliable, useful, and timely information 
for transparency and accountability of these programs and their 
operations. Legislators, oversight bodies, those charged with 
governance, and the public need to know whether (1) 
management and officials manage government resources and use 
their authority properly and in compliance with laws and 
regulations; (2) government programs are achieving their 
objectives and desired outcomes; and (3) government services 
are provided effectively, efficiently, economically, ethically, and 
equitably. 

 

1.23 Examples of program effectiveness and results audit 
objectives include 

f. determining whether a program provides access to or 
distribution of public resources within the context of 
statutory parameters; 

 

1.23 Examples of program effectiveness and results audit 
objectives include 

f. determining whether a program provides equitable access 
to or distribution of public resources within the context of 
statutory parameters; 

3.83 Auditors who previously provided nonaudit services for an 
entity that is a prospective subject of an engagement should 
evaluate the effect of those nonaudit services on independence 
before agreeing to conduct a GAGAS engagement. If auditors 
provided a nonaudit service in the period to be covered by the 
engagement, they should (1) determine if GAGAS expressly 
prohibits the nonaudit service; (2) if audited entity management 
requested the nonaudit service, determine whether the skills, 
knowledge, and experience of the individual responsible for 
overseeing the nonaudit service were sufficient; and (3) determine 
whether a threat to independence exists and address any threats 
noted in accordance with the conceptual framework. 

3.83 Auditors who previously provided nonaudit services for an 
entity that is a prospective subject of an engagement should 
evaluate the effect of those nonaudit services on independence 
before agreeing to conduct a GAGAS engagement. If auditors 
provided a nonaudit service in the period to be covered by the 
engagement, they should (1) determine if GAGAS expressly 
prohibits the nonaudit service; (2) if audited entity management 
requested the nonaudit service, determine whether the skill, 
knowledge, or experience of the individual responsible for 
overseeing the nonaudit service was sufficient; and (3) determine 
whether a threat to independence exists and address any threats 
noted in accordance with the conceptual framework. 

 




8.42 If internal control is significant to the audit objectives, 
auditors determine which of the five components of internal 
control and underlying principles are significant to the audit 
objectives, as all components of internal control are generally 
relevant, but not all components may be significant to the audit 
objectives. This determination can also identify whether specific 
controls are significant to the audit objectives. Determining which 
internal control components and principles and/or specific controls 
are significant to the audit objectives is a matter of professional 
judgment. 

 

8.42 If internal control is significant to the audit objectives, 
auditors determine which of the five components of internal 
control are significant to the audit objectives, as all components of 
internal control are generally relevant, but not all components may 
be significant to the audit objectives. This determination can also 
identify the underlying principles, control objectives, or specific 
controls that are significant to the audit objectives. Determining 
which internal control components, principles, control objectives, 
and/or specific controls are significant to the audit objectives is a 
matter of professional judgment. 

8.49 If internal control is determined to be significant to the audit 
objectives, auditors should assess and document their 
assessment of the design, implementation, and/or operating 
effectiveness of such internal control to the extent necessary to 
address the audit objectives. 

 

8.49 If internal control is determined to be significant to the audit 
objectives, auditors should plan and perform audit procedures to 
assess internal control to the extent necessary to address the 
audit objectives. 

9.30 If some but not all internal control components are significant 
to the audit objectives, the auditors should identify as part of the 
scope those internal control components and underlying principles 
that are significant to the audit objectives. 

 

9.30 When reporting on the scope of their work on internal control, 
auditors should identify the scope of internal control assessed to 
the extent necessary for report users to reasonably interpret the 
findings, conclusions, and recommendations in the audit report. 

9.32 Control components and underlying principles that are not 
considered significant to the audit objectives may be identified in 
the scope if, in the auditors’ professional judgment, doing so is 
necessary to preclude a misunderstanding of the breadth of the 
conclusions of the audit report and to clarify that control 
effectiveness has not been evaluated as a whole. Auditors may 
also identify and describe the five components of internal control 
so that report users understand the scope of the work within the 
context of the entity’s internal control system. 

9.32 Auditors may identify the control components, underlying 
principles, control objectives, or specific controls assessed in 
describing the scope of their work on internal control. Auditors 
may also identify the level of internal control assessment 
performed, as discussed in paragraph 8.50. Control components 
and underlying principles that are not considered significant to the 
audit objectives may be identified in the scope if, in the auditors’ 
professional judgment, doing so is necessary to preclude a 
misunderstanding of the breadth of the conclusions of the audit 
report and to clarify that control effectiveness has not been 
evaluated as a whole. Auditors may also identify and describe the 
five components of internal control so that report users 
understand the scope of the work within the context of the entity’s 
internal control system. 

 



 

Conforming changes have been made to the figures to reflect the technical updates. 


Contents 



Letter 1 
Chapter 1: Foundation and Principles for the Use and Application of Government Auditing Standards 3 
Introduction 3 
Types of GAGAS Users 6 
Types of GAGAS Engagements 7 
Financial Audits 7 
Attestation Engagements and Reviews of Financial 
Statements 9 
Performance Audits 10 
Terms Used in GAGAS 15 
The GAGAS Format 16 
Chapter 2: General Requirements for Complying with Government Auditing Standards 18 
Complying with GAGAS 18 
Relationship between GAGAS and Other Professional Standards 20 
Stating Compliance with GAGAS in the Audit Report 22 
Chapter 3: Ethics, Independence, and Professional Judgment 25 
Ethical Principles 25 
The Public Interest 26 
Integrity 26 
Objectivity 27 
Proper Use of Government Information, Resources, and 
Positions 27 
Professional Behavior 28 
Independence 28 
GAGAS Conceptual Framework Approach to 
Independence 31 
Provision of Nonaudit Services to Audited Entities 43 
Consideration of Specific Nonaudit Services 50 
Documentation 57 
Professional Judgment 58 
Chapter 4: Competence and Continuing Professional Education 63 
Competence 63 
Continuing Professional Education 67 
Chapter 5: Quality Control and Peer Review 81 
Quality Control and Assurance 81 
System of Quality Control 81 
Leadership Responsibilities for Quality within the Audit 
Organization 82 
Independence, Legal, and Ethical Requirements 82 
Initiation, Acceptance, and Continuance of Engagements 84 
Human Resources 84 
Engagement Performance 86 
Monitoring of Quality 91 
External Peer Review 96 
Additional Requirements for Audit Organizations Not 
Affiliated with Recognized Organizations 102 
Chapter 6: Standards for Financial Audits 109 
Additional GAGAS Requirements for Conducting Financial Audits 109 
Compliance with Standards 109 
Licensing and Certification 110 
Auditor Communication 110 
Results of Previous Engagements 111 
Investigations or Legal Proceedings 112 
Noncompliance with Provisions of Laws, Regulations, 
Contracts, and Grant Agreements 112 
Findings 113 
Audit Documentation 116 
Availability of Individuals and Documentation 117 
Additional GAGAS Requirements for Reporting on Financial 
Audits 118 
Reporting the Auditors’ Compliance with GAGAS 118 
Reporting on Internal Control; Compliance with Provisions 
of Laws, Regulations, Contracts, and Grant 
Agreements; and Instances of Fraud 119 
Presenting Findings in the Audit Report 121 
Reporting Findings Directly to Parties outside the Audited 
Entity 122 
Obtaining and Reporting the Views of Responsible Officials 123 
Reporting Confidential or Sensitive Information 125 
Distributing Reports 126 
Chapter 7: Standards for Attestation Engagements and Reviews of Financial Statements 127 
Examination Engagements 128 
Compliance with Standards 128 
Licensing and Certification 129 
Auditor Communication 129 
Results of Previous Engagements 130 
Investigations or Legal Proceedings 130 
Noncompliance with Provisions of Laws, Regulations, 
Contracts, and Grant Agreements 131 
Findings 132 
Examination Engagement Documentation 135 
Availability of Individuals and Documentation 136 
Reporting the Auditors’ Compliance with GAGAS 136 
Reporting Deficiencies in Internal Control 137 
Reporting on Noncompliance with Provisions of Laws, 
Regulations, Contracts, and Grant Agreements or 
Instances of Fraud 138 
Presenting Findings in the Report 139 
Reporting Findings Directly to Parties outside the Audited 
Entity 139 
Obtaining and Reporting the Views of Responsible Officials 140 
Reporting Confidential or Sensitive Information 142 
Distributing Reports 143 
Review Engagements 144 
Compliance with Standards 144 
Licensing and Certification 144 
Noncompliance with Provisions of Laws, Regulations, 
Contracts, and Grant Agreements 145 
Reporting Auditors’ Compliance with GAGAS 145 
Distributing Reports 146 
Agreed-Upon Procedures Engagements 147 
Compliance with Standards 147 
Licensing and Certification 147 
Noncompliance with Provisions of Laws, Regulations, 
Contracts, and Grant Agreements 148 
Reporting Auditors’ Compliance with GAGAS 148 
Distributing Reports 149 
Reviews of Financial Statements 150 
Compliance with Standards 150 
Licensing and Certification 150 
Noncompliance with Provisions of Laws, Regulations, 
Contracts, and Grant Agreements 151 
Reporting Auditors’ Compliance with GAGAS 151 
Distributing Reports 152 
Chapter 8: Fieldwork Standards for Performance Audits 154 
Planning 154 
Auditor Communication 158 
Investigations or Legal Proceedings 159 
Results of Previous Engagements 160 
Assigning Auditors 160 
Preparing a Written Audit Plan 161 
Conducting the Engagement 162 
Nature and Profile of the Program and User Needs 162 
Determining Significance and Obtaining an Understanding 
of Internal Control 165 
Assessing Internal Control 168 
Internal Control Deficiencies Considerations 169 
Information Systems Controls Considerations 171 
Provisions of Laws, Regulations, Contracts, and Grant 
Agreements 174 
Fraud 175 
Identifying Sources of Evidence and the Amount and Type 
of Evidence Required 177 
Using the Work of Others 177 
Supervision 179 
Evidence 179 
Overall Assessment of Evidence 185 
Findings 186 
Audit Documentation 190 
Availability of Individuals and Documentation 192 
Chapter 9: Reporting Standards for Performance Audits 194 
Reporting Auditors’ Compliance with GAGAS 194 
Report Format 195 
Report Content 195 
Reporting Findings, Conclusions, and Recommendations 199 
Reporting on Internal Control 201 
Reporting on Noncompliance with Provisions of Laws, 
Regulations, Contracts, and Grant Agreements 203 
Reporting on Instances of Fraud 204 
Reporting Findings Directly to Parties outside the Audited 
Entity 205 
Obtaining the Views of Responsible Officials 206 
Report Distribution 207 
Reporting Confidential or Sensitive Information 208 
Discovery of Insufficient Evidence after Report Release 210 
Glossary 211 
Acknowledgments 222 
Comptroller General’s Advisory Council on Government Auditing 
Standards (2016-2020) 222 
GAO Project Team 223 
Staff Acknowledgments 223 
Figures 
Figure 1: Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards 
Conceptual Framework for Independence 61 
Figure 2: Independence Considerations for Preparing Accounting 
Records and Financial Statements 62 
Figure 3: Developing Peer Review Communications for Observed 
Matters in Accordance with Generally Accepted 
Government Auditing Standards 108 
Figure 4: Consideration of Internal Control in a Generally 
Accepted Government Auditing Standards Performance 
Audit 193 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Abbreviations 

 

AICPA American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 

AR-C AICPA Codification of Statements on Standards for 
Accounting and Review Services 

AT-C AICPA Codification of Statements on Standards for Attestation 
Engagements 

AU-C AICPA Codification of Statements on Auditing Standards 

CPA certified public accountant 

CPE continuing professional education 

GAGAS generally accepted government auditing standards 

IAASB International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board 

IT information technology 

OMB Office of Management and Budget 

PCAOB Public Company Accounting Oversight Board 

SAS Statements on Auditing Standards 

SSAE Statements on Standards for Attestation Engagements 

 

This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the 
United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety 
without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain 
copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be 
necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. 




Letter 

 



Audits provide essential accountability and transparency over government 
programs. Given the current challenges facing governments and their 
programs, the oversight provided through auditing is more critical than 
ever. Government auditing provides the objective analysis and 
information needed to make the decisions necessary to help create a 
better future. The professional standards presented in this 2018 revision 
of Government Auditing Standards (known as the Yellow Book) provide a 
framework for performing high-quality audit work with competence, 
integrity, objectivity, and independence to provide accountability and to 
help improve government operations and services. These standards, 
commonly referred to as generally accepted government auditing 
standards (GAGAS), provide the foundation for government auditors to 
lead by example in the areas of independence, transparency, 
accountability, and quality through the audit process. 

This revision contains major changes from, and supersedes, the 2011 
revision. These changes, summarized below, reinforce the principles of 
transparency and accountability and strengthen the framework for high-
quality government audits. 

• All chapters are presented in a revised format that differentiates 
requirements and application guidance related to those requirements. 
• Supplemental guidance from the appendix of the 2011 revision is 
either removed or incorporated into the individual chapters. 
• The independence standard is expanded to state that preparing 
financial statements from a client-provided trial balance or underlying 
accounting records generally creates significant threats to auditors’ 
independence, and auditors should document the threats and 
safeguards applied to eliminate and reduce threats to an acceptable 
level or decline to perform the service. 
• The peer review standard is modified to require that audit 
organizations comply with their respective affiliated organization’s 
peer review requirements and GAGAS peer review requirements. 
Additional requirements are provided for audit organizations not 
affiliated with recognized organizations. 
• The standards include a definition for waste. 
• The performance audit standards are updated with specific 
considerations for when internal control is significant to the audit 
objectives. 



Effective with the implementation dates for the 2018 revision of 
Government Auditing Standards, GAO is also retiring Government 
Auditing Standards: Guidance on GAGAS Requirements for Continuing 
Professional Education (GAO-05-568G, April 2005) and Government 
Auditing Standards: Guidance for Understanding the New Peer Review 
Ratings (D06602, January 2014). 

This revision of the standards has gone through an extensive deliberative 
process, including public comments and input from the Comptroller 
General’s Advisory Council on Government Auditing Standards (Advisory 
Council). The Advisory Council consists of experts in financial and 
performance auditing and reporting from federal, state, and local 
government; the private sector; and academia. The views of all parties 
were thoroughly considered in finalizing the standards. 

The 2018 revision of Government Auditing Standards is effective for 
financial audits, attestation engagements, and reviews of financial 
statements for periods ending on or after June 30, 2020, and for 
performance audits beginning on or after July 1, 2019. Early 
implementation is not permitted. 

An electronic version of this document can be accessed at 
http://www.gao.gov/yellowbook. 

I extend special thanks to the members of the Advisory Council for their 
extensive input and feedback throughout the process of developing and 
finalizing the standards. 

 


Gene L. Dodaro 
Comptroller General of the United States 

July 2018 

 


Chapter 1: Foundation and Principles for the 
Use and Application of Government Auditing 
Standards 



1.01 This chapter provides guidance for engagements conducted in 
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards 
(GAGAS). This chapter also 

a. explains the types of auditors and audit organizations that may 
employ GAGAS to conduct their work, 
b. identifies the types of engagements that may be conducted in 
accordance with GAGAS, and 
c. explains terminology that is commonly used in GAGAS. 


 


Introduction 



1.02 The concept of accountability for use of public resources and 
government authority is key to our nation’s governing processes. 
Management and officials entrusted with public resources are responsible 
for carrying out public functions and providing service to the public 
effectively, efficiently, economically, ethically, and equitably within the 
context of the statutory boundaries of the specific government program. 

1.03 As reflected in applicable laws, regulations, agreements, and 
standards, management and officials of government programs are 
responsible for providing reliable, useful, and timely information for 
transparency and accountability of these programs and their operations. 
Legislators, oversight bodies, those charged with governance, and the 
public need to know whether (1) management and officials manage 
government resources and use their authority properly and in compliance 
with laws and regulations; (2) government programs are achieving their 
objectives and desired outcomes; and (3) government services are 
provided effectively, efficiently, economically, ethically, and equitably. 

1.04 “Those charged with governance” refers to the individuals 
responsible for overseeing the strategic direction of the entity and 
obligations related to the accountability of the entity. This includes 
overseeing the financial reporting process, subject matter, or program 
under audit, including related internal controls. Those charged with 
governance may also be part of the entity’s management. In some 
audited entities, multiple parties may be charged with governance, 
including oversight bodies, members or staff of legislative committees, 
boards of directors, audit committees, or parties contracting for the 
engagement. 


1.05 Government auditing is essential in providing accountability to 
legislators, oversight bodies, those charged with governance, and the 
public. GAGAS engagements provide an independent, objective, 
nonpartisan assessment of the stewardship, performance, or cost of 
government policies, programs, or operations, depending upon the type 
and scope of the engagement. 

1.06 The professional standards and guidance contained in this 
document provide a framework for conducting high-quality engagements 
with competence, integrity, objectivity, and independence. Auditors of 
government entities, entities that receive government awards, and other 
entities, as required by law or regulation or as they elect, may use these 
standards. Overall, GAGAS contains standards for engagements 
comprising individual requirements that are identified by terminology as 
discussed in paragraphs 2.02 through 2.10. GAGAS contains 
requirements and guidance dealing with ethics, independence, auditors’ 
professional judgment and competence, quality control, peer review, 
conducting the engagement, and reporting. 

1.07 Engagements conducted in accordance with GAGAS provide 
information used for oversight, accountability, transparency, and 
improvements of government programs and operations. GAGAS contains 
requirements and guidance to assist auditors in objectively obtaining and 
evaluating sufficient, appropriate evidence and reporting the results. 
When auditors conduct their work in this manner and comply with GAGAS 
in reporting the results, their work can lead to improved government 
management, better decision making and oversight, effective and efficient 
operations, and accountability and transparency for resources and 
results. 

1.08 Laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements, and policies 
frequently require that engagements be conducted in accordance with 
GAGAS. In addition, many auditors and audit organizations voluntarily 
choose to conduct their work in accordance with GAGAS. The 
requirements and guidance in GAGAS in totality apply to engagements 
pertaining to government entities, programs, activities, and functions, and 
to government assistance administered by contractors, nonprofit entities, 
and other nongovernmental entities when the use of GAGAS is required 
or voluntarily adopted. 

1.09 The following are some of the laws, regulations, and other 
authoritative sources that require the use of GAGAS: 


a. The Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.), 
requires that the federal inspectors general appointed under that 
act comply with GAGAS for audits of federal establishments, 
organizations, programs, activities, and functions. The act further 
states that the inspectors general shall take appropriate steps to 
assure that any work performed by nonfederal auditors complies 
with GAGAS. 
b. The Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-576), as 
expanded by the Government Management Reform Act of 1994 
(Public Law 103-356), requires that GAGAS be followed in audits 
of major executive branch departments’ and agencies’ financial 
statements. The Accountability of Tax Dollars Act of 2002 (Public 
Law 107-289) generally extends this requirement to most 
executive agencies not subject to the Chief Financial Officers Act. 
c. The Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996 (Public Law 104-156) 
requires that GAGAS be followed in audits of state and local 
governments and nonprofit entities that receive federal awards. 
Subpart F of OMB’s Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost 
Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards (2 C.F.R. 
part 200), which provides the government-wide guidelines and 
policies on conducting audits to comply with the Single Audit Act, 
reiterates the requirement to use GAGAS. 


1.10 Other laws, regulations, or authoritative sources may require the use 
of GAGAS. For example, auditors at the state and local government 
levels may be required by state and local laws and regulations to follow 
GAGAS. Also, auditors may be required by the terms of an agreement or 
contract to follow GAGAS. Auditors may also be required to follow 
GAGAS by federal audit guidelines pertaining to program requirements. 
Being aware of such other laws, regulations, or authoritative sources may 
assist auditors in performing their work in accordance with the required 
standards. 

1.11 Even if not required to do so, auditors may find it useful to follow 
GAGAS in conducting engagements pertaining to federal, state, and local 
government programs as well as engagements pertaining to state and 
local government awards that contractors, nonprofit entities, and other 
nongovernmental entities administer. Though not formally required to do 
so, many audit organizations, both in the United States and in other 
countries, voluntarily follow GAGAS. 

 


Types of GAGAS 
Users 



1.12 GAGAS provides standards that are used by a wide range of 
auditors and audit organizations that audit government entities, entities 
that receive government awards, and other entities. These auditors and 
audit organizations may also be subject to additional requirements unique 
to their environments. Examples of the various types of users who may 
be required or may elect to use GAGAS include the following: 

a. Contract auditors: audit organizations that specialize in conducting 
engagements pertaining to government acquisitions and contract 
administration 
b. Certified public accounting firms: public accounting organizations 
in the private sector that provide audit, attestation, or review 
services under contract to government entities or recipients of 
government funds 
c. Federal inspectors general: government audit organizations within 
federal agencies that conduct engagements and investigations 
relating to the programs and operations of their agencies and 
issue reports both to agency management and to third parties 
external to the audited entity 
d. Federal agency internal auditors: internal government audit 
organizations associated with federal agencies that conduct 
engagements and investigations relating to the programs and 
operations of their agencies 
e. Municipal auditors: elected or appointed officials in government 
audit organizations in the United States at the city, county, and 
other local government levels 
f. State auditors: elected or appointed officials in audit organizations 
in the governments of the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and 
the U.S. territories 
g. Supreme audit institutions: national government audit 
organizations, in the United States or elsewhere, typically headed 
by a comptroller general or auditor general 


 


Types of GAGAS 
Engagements 

1.13 This section describes the types of engagements that audit 
organizations may conduct in accordance with GAGAS. This description 
is not intended to limit or require the types of engagements that may be 
conducted in accordance with GAGAS. 

1.14 All GAGAS engagements begin with objectives, and those objectives 
determine the type of engagement to be conducted and the applicable 
standards to be followed. This document classifies financial audits, 
attestation engagements, reviews of financial statements, and 
performance audits, as defined by their objectives, as the types of 
engagements that are covered by GAGAS. 

1.15 In some GAGAS engagements, the standards applicable to the 
specific objective will be apparent. For example, if the objective is to 
express an opinion on financial statements, the standards for financial 
audits apply. However, some engagements may have objectives that 
could be met using more than one approach. For example, if the objective 
is to determine the reliability of performance measures, auditors can 
perform this work in accordance with either the standards for attestation 
engagements or performance audits. 

1.16 GAGAS requirements and guidance apply to the types of 
engagements that auditors may conduct in accordance with GAGAS as 
follows: 

a. Financial audits: the requirements and guidance in chapters 1 
through 6 apply. 
b. Attestation-level examination, review, and agreed-upon 
procedures engagements and reviews of financial statements: the 
requirements and guidance in chapters 1 through 5 and 7 apply. 
c. Performance audits: the requirements and guidance in chapters 1 
through 5, 8, and 9 apply. 


 


Financial Audits 



1.17 Financial audits provide independent assessments of whether 
entities’ reported financial information (e.g., financial condition, results, 
and use of resources) is presented fairly, in all material respects, in 
accordance with recognized criteria. Financial audits conducted in 
accordance with GAGAS include financial statement audits and other 
related financial audits. 


a. Financial statement audits: The primary purpose of a financial 
statement audit is to provide financial statement users with an 
opinion by an auditor on whether an entity’s financial statements 
are presented fairly, in all material respects, in accordance with an 
applicable financial reporting framework. Reporting on financial 
statement audits conducted in accordance with GAGAS also 
includes reports on internal control over financial reporting and on 
compliance with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and 
grant agreements that have a material effect on the financial 
statements. 
b. Other types of financial audits: Other types of financial audits 
conducted in accordance with GAGAS entail various scopes of 
work, including 
(1) obtaining sufficient, appropriate evidence to form an 
opinion on a single financial statement or specified 
elements, accounts, or line items of a financial statement;1 
(2) issuing letters (commonly referred to as comfort letters) for 
underwriters and certain other requesting parties;2 
(3) auditing applicable compliance and internal control 
requirements relating to one or more government 
programs;3 and 
(4) conducting an audit of internal control over financial 
reporting that is integrated with an audit of financial 
statements (integrated audit).4 


1See AU-C section 805, Special Considerations – Audits of Single Financial Statements 
and Specific Elements, Accounts, or Items of a Financial Statement (AICPA, Professional 
Standards). 

2See AU-C section 920, Letters for Underwriters and Certain Other Requesting Parties 
(AICPA, Professional Standards). 

3See AU-C section 935, Compliance Audits (AICPA, Professional Standards). 

4See AU-C section 940, An Audit of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting That Is 
Integrated With an Audit of Financial Statements (AICPA, Professional Standards). 

 


 

Attestation Engagements 
and Reviews of Financial 
Statements 



1.18 Attestation engagements can cover a broad range of financial or 
nonfinancial objectives about the subject matter or assertion depending 
on the users’ needs. In an attestation engagement, the subject matter or 
an assertion by a party other than the auditors is measured or evaluated 
in accordance with suitable criteria. The work the auditors perform and 
the level of assurance associated with the report vary based on the type 
of attestation engagement. The three types of attestation engagements 
are as follows: 

a. Examination: An auditor obtains reasonable assurance by 
obtaining sufficient, appropriate evidence about the measurement 
or evaluation of subject matter against criteria in order to be able 
to draw reasonable conclusions on which to base the auditor’s 
opinion about whether the subject matter is in accordance with (or 
based on) the criteria or the assertion is fairly stated, in all material 
respects. The auditor obtains the same level of assurance in an 
examination as in a financial statement audit.5 
b. Review: An auditor obtains limited assurance by obtaining 
sufficient, appropriate review evidence about the measurement or 
evaluation of subject matter against criteria in order to express a 
conclusion about whether any material modification should be 
made to the subject matter in order for it to be in accordance with 
(or based on) the criteria or to the assertion in order for it to be 
fairly stated. Review-level work does not include reporting on 
internal control or compliance with provisions of laws, regulations, 
contracts, and grant agreements. The auditor obtains the same 
level of assurance in a review engagement as in a review of 
financial statements.6 
c. Agreed-upon procedures engagement: An auditor performs 
specific procedures on subject matter or an assertion and reports 
the findings without providing an opinion or a conclusion on it. The 
specified parties to the engagement agree upon and are 
responsible for the sufficiency of the procedures for their 


5See AT-C section 205, Examination Engagements (AICPA, Professional Standards). 

6See AT-C section 210, Review Engagements (AICPA, Professional Standards). 


purposes. The specified parties are the intended users to whom 
use of the report is limited.7 


7See AT-C section 215, Agreed-Upon Procedures Engagements (AICPA, Professional 
Standards). 

8See AR-C section 90, Review of Financial Statements (AICPA, Professional Standards). 

1.19 The subject matter of an attestation engagement may take many 
forms, including the following: 

a. historical or prospective performance or condition, historical or 
prospective financial information, performance measurements, or 
backlog data; 
b. physical characteristics, for example, narrative descriptions or 
square footage of facilities; 
c. historical events, for example, the price of a market basket of 
goods on a certain date; 
d. analyses, for example, break-even analyses; 
e. systems and processes, for example, internal control; and 
f. behavior, for example, corporate governance, compliance with 
laws and regulations, and human resource practices. 


1.20 The objective of the auditor when performing a review of financial 
statements is to obtain limited assurance as a basis for reporting whether 
the auditor is aware of any material modifications that should be made to 
financial statements in order for the financial statements to be in 
accordance with the applicable financial reporting framework. A review of 
financial statements does not include obtaining an understanding of the 
entity’s internal control, assessing fraud risk, or certain other procedures 
ordinarily performed in an audit.8 

 

Performance Audits 




1.21 Performance audits provide objective analysis, findings, and 
conclusions to assist management and those charged with governance 
and oversight with, among other things, improving program performance 
and operations, reducing costs, facilitating decision making by parties 


responsible for overseeing or initiating corrective action, and contributing 
to public accountability. 

1.22 Performance audit objectives vary widely and include assessments 
of program effectiveness, economy, and efficiency; internal control; 
compliance; and prospective analyses. Audit objectives may also pertain 
to the current status or condition of a program. These overall objectives 
are not mutually exclusive. For example, a performance audit with an 
objective of determining or evaluating program effectiveness may also 
involve an additional objective of evaluating the program’s internal 
controls. Key categories of performance audit objectives include the 
following: 

a. Program effectiveness and results audit objectives. These are 
frequently interrelated with economy and efficiency objectives. 
Audit objectives that focus on program effectiveness and results 
typically measure the extent to which a program is achieving its 
goals and objectives. Audit objectives that focus on economy and 
efficiency address the costs and resources used to achieve 
program results. 
b. Internal control audit objectives. These relate to an assessment of 
one or more aspects of an entity’s system of internal control that is 
designed to provide reasonable assurance of achieving effective 
and efficient operations, reliability of reporting for internal and 
external use, or compliance with provisions of applicable laws and 
regulations. Internal control objectives also may be relevant when 
determining the cause of unsatisfactory program performance. 
Internal control is a process effected by an entity’s oversight body, 
management, and other personnel that provides reasonable 
assurance that the objectives of an entity will be achieved. Internal 
control comprises the plans, methods, policies, and procedures 
used to fulfill the mission, strategic plan, goals, and objectives of 
the entity. 
c. Compliance audit objectives. These relate to an assessment of 
compliance with criteria established by provisions of laws, 
regulations, contracts, and grant agreements, or other 
requirements that could affect the acquisition, protection, use, and 
disposition of the entity’s resources and the quantity, quality, 
timeliness, and cost of services the entity produces and delivers. 
Compliance requirements can be either financial or nonfinancial. 



d. Prospective analysis audit objectives. These provide analysis or 
conclusions about information that is based on assumptions about 
events that may occur in the future, along with possible actions 
that the entity may take in response to the future events. 


1.23 Examples of program effectiveness and results audit objectives 
include 

a. assessing the extent to which legislative, regulatory, or 
organizational goals and objectives are being achieved; 
b. assessing the relative ability of alternative approaches to yield 
better program performance or eliminate factors that inhibit 
program effectiveness; 
c. analyzing the relative cost-effectiveness of a program or activity, 
focusing on combining cost information or other inputs with 
(1) information about outputs or the benefit provided or 
(2) outcomes or the results achieved; 
d. determining whether a program produced intended results or 
produced results that were not consistent with the program’s 
objectives; 
e. determining the current status or condition of program operations 
or progress in implementing legislative requirements; 
f. determining whether a program provides equitable access to or 
distribution of public resources within the context of statutory 
parameters; 
g. assessing the extent to which programs duplicate, overlap, or 
conflict with other related programs; 
h. evaluating whether the entity is following sound procurement 
practices; 
i. assessing the reliability, validity, or relevance of performance 
measures concerning program effectiveness and results or 
economy and efficiency; 
j. assessing the reliability, validity, or relevance of financial 
information related to the performance of a program; 



k. determining whether government resources (inputs) are obtained 
at reasonable costs while meeting timeliness and quality 
considerations; 
l. determining whether appropriate value was obtained based on the 
cost or amount paid or based on the amount of revenue received; 
m. determining whether government services and benefits are 
accessible to those individuals who have a right to access those 
services and benefits; 
n. determining whether fees assessed cover costs; 
o. determining whether and how the program’s unit costs can be 
decreased or its productivity increased; and 
p. assessing the reliability, validity, or relevance of budget proposals 
or budget requests to assist legislatures in the budget process. 


1.24 Examples of internal control audit objectives include determining 
whether 

a. organizational missions, goals, and objectives are achieved 
effectively and efficiently; 
b. resources are used in compliance with laws, regulations, or other 
requirements; 
c. resources, including sensitive information accessed or stored 
outside the organization’s physical perimeter, are safeguarded 
against unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition; 
d. management information, such as performance measures, and 
public reports are complete, accurate, and consistent to support 
performance and decision making; 
e. the integrity of information from computerized systems is 
achieved; and 
f. contingency planning for information systems provides essential 
backup to prevent unwarranted disruption of the activities and 
functions that the systems support. 



1.25 Examples of compliance objectives include determining whether 

a. the purpose of the program, the manner in which it is to be 
conducted, the services delivered, the outcomes, or the population 
it serves is in compliance with provisions of laws, regulations, 
contracts, or grant agreements or other requirements; 
b. government services and benefits are distributed or delivered to 
citizens based on eligibility to obtain those services and benefits; 
c. incurred or proposed costs are in compliance with applicable laws, 
regulations, contracts, or grant agreements; and 
d. revenues received are in compliance with applicable laws, 
regulations, contracts, or grant agreements. 


1.26 Examples of prospective analysis objectives include providing 
conclusions based on 

a. current and projected trends and future potential impact on 
government programs and services and their implications for 
program or policy alternatives; 
b. program or policy alternatives, including forecasting program 
outcomes under various assumptions; 
c. policy or legislative proposals, including advantages, 
disadvantages, and analysis of stakeholder views; 
d. prospective information prepared by management; 
e. budgets and forecasts that are based on (1) assumptions about 
expected future events and (2) stakeholders’ and management’s 
expected reaction to those future events; and 
f. management’s assumptions on which prospective information is 
based. 


 


 

Terms Used in 
GAGAS 



1.27 This paragraph describes certain terms used in GAGAS. When 
terminology differs from that used at an organization subject to GAGAS, 
auditors use professional judgment to determine if there is an equivalent 
term.9 

9See the Glossary for an expanded list of terms used in GAGAS. 

a. Attestation engagement: An examination, review, or agreed-upon 
procedures engagement conducted under the GAGAS attestation 
standards related to subject matter or an assertion that is the 
responsibility of another party. 
b. Audit: Either a financial audit or performance audit conducted in 
accordance with GAGAS. 
c. Audit organization: A government audit entity or a public 
accounting firm or other audit entity that conducts GAGAS 
engagements. 
d. Audit report: A report issued as a result of a financial audit, 
attestation engagement, review of financial statements, or 
performance audit conducted in accordance with GAGAS. 
e. Audited entity: The entity that is subject to a GAGAS engagement, 
whether that engagement is a financial audit, attestation 
engagement, review of financial statements, or performance audit. 
f. Auditor: An individual assigned to planning, directing, performing 
engagement procedures, or reporting on GAGAS engagements 
(including work on audits, attestation engagements, and reviews 
of financial statements) regardless of job title. Therefore, 
individuals who may have the title auditor, information technology 
auditor, analyst, practitioner, evaluator, inspector, or other similar 
titles are considered auditors under GAGAS. 
g. Control objective: The aim or purpose of specified controls; control 
objectives address the risks related to achieving an entity’s 
objectives. 



h. Engagement: A financial audit, attestation engagement, review of 
financial statements, or performance audit conducted in 
accordance with GAGAS. 
i. Engagement team (or audit team): Auditors assigned to planning, 
directing, performing engagement procedures, or reporting on 
GAGAS engagements. 
j. Engaging party: The party that engages the auditor to conduct the 
GAGAS engagement. 
k. Entity objective: What an entity wants to achieve; entity objectives 
are intended to meet the entity’s mission, strategic plan, and goals 
and the requirements of applicable laws and regulations. 
l. External audit organization: An audit organization that issues 
reports to third parties external to the audited entity, either 
exclusively or in addition to issuing reports to senior management 
and those charged with governance of the audited entity. 
m. Internal audit organization: An audit organization that is 
accountable to senior management and those charged with 
governance of the audited entity and that does not generally issue 
reports to third parties external to the audited entity. 
n. Responsible party: The party responsible for a GAGAS 
engagement’s subject matter. 
o. Review of financial statements: An engagement conducted under 
GAGAS for review of financial statements. 
p. Specialist: An individual or organization possessing special skill or 
knowledge in a particular field other than accounting or auditing 
that assists auditors in conducting engagements. A specialist may 
be either an internal specialist or an external specialist. 


 


The GAGAS Format 



1.28 GAGAS uses a format designed to allow auditors to quickly identify 
requirements and application guidance related to those requirements. 
GAGAS requirements are differentiated from application guidance by 
borders surrounding the text. The requirements are followed immediately 
by application guidance that relates directly to the preceding 


requirements. The auditors’ responsibilities related to requirements and 
application guidance are discussed in paragraphs 2.02 through 2.10. 


Chapter 2: General Requirements for 
Complying with Government Auditing 
Standards 



2.01 This chapter establishes general requirements for complying with 
generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS) that are 
applicable to all GAGAS engagements. The information it contains relates 
to how auditors conducting GAGAS engagements identify and apply the 
requirements contained in GAGAS. The chapter also contains 
requirements for using other audit standards in conjunction with GAGAS 
and for reporting compliance with GAGAS in the audit report. 

 


Complying with 
GAGAS 



Requirements: Complying with GAGAS 

2.02 GAGAS uses two categories of requirements, identified by 
specific terms, to describe the degree of responsibility they impose on 
auditors and audit organizations: 

a. Unconditional requirements: Auditors and audit organizations 
must comply with an unconditional requirement in all cases 
where such requirement is relevant. GAGAS uses must to 
indicate an unconditional requirement. 
b. Presumptively mandatory requirements: Auditors and audit 
organizations must comply with a presumptively mandatory 
requirement in all cases where such a requirement is relevant 
except in rare circumstances discussed in paragraphs 2.03, 
2.04, and 2.08. GAGAS uses should to indicate a 
presumptively mandatory requirement.10 


2.03 In rare circumstances, auditors and audit organizations may 
determine it necessary to depart from a relevant presumptively 
mandatory requirement. In such rare circumstances, auditors should 
perform alternative procedures to achieve the intent of that 
requirement. 

2.04 If, in rare circumstances, auditors judge it necessary to depart 
from a relevant presumptively mandatory requirement, they must 
document their justification for the departure and how the alternative 



10See para. 2.19 for additional documentation requirements for departures from GAGAS 
requirements. 


procedures performed in the circumstances were sufficient to achieve 
the intent of that requirement. 

2.05 Auditors should have an understanding of the entire text of 
applicable chapters of GAGAS, including application guidance, and 
any amendments that GAO issued, to understand the intent of the 
requirements and to apply the requirements properly.11 

 

2.06 Auditors should consider applicable GAO-issued GAGAS 
interpretive guidance in conducting and reporting on GAGAS 
engagements.12 



11See http://www.gao.gov/yellowbook for GAGAS amendments. 

12See http://www.gao.gov/yellowbook for GAGAS interpretive guidance. 

13See paras. 2.13, 6.01, and 7.01 for discussion of standards incorporated by reference. 

 

Application Guidance: Complying with GAGAS 

2.07 GAGAS contains requirements together with related explanatory 
material in the form of application guidance. Not every paragraph of 
GAGAS carries a requirement. Rather, GAGAS identifies the 
requirements through use of specific language. GAGAS also contains 
introductory material that provides context relevant to a proper 
understanding of a GAGAS chapter or section. Having an understanding 
of the entire text of applicable GAGAS includes an understanding of any 
financial audit, attestation, and reviews of financial statement standards 
incorporated by reference.13 

2.08 The need for auditors to depart from a relevant presumptively 
mandatory requirement is expected to arise only when the requirement is 
for a specific procedure to be performed and, in the specific 
circumstances of the engagement, that procedure would be ineffective in 
achieving the intent of the requirement. 

2.09 The application guidance provides further explanation of the 
requirements and guidance for applying them. In particular, it may explain 
more precisely what a requirement means or is intended to address or 
include examples of procedures that may be appropriate in the 
circumstances. Although such guidance does not in itself impose a 


requirement, it is relevant to the proper application of the requirements. 
“May,” “might,” and “could” are used to describe these actions and 
procedures. The application guidance may also provide background 
information on matters addressed in GAGAS. 

2.10 Interpretive guidance is not auditing standards. Interpretive guidance 
provides guidance on the application of GAGAS and recommendations 
on the application of GAGAS in specific circumstances. 

 

Relationship between 
GAGAS and Other 
Professional 
Standards 




Requirement: Relationship between GAGAS and Other 
Professional Standards 

2.11 When auditors cite compliance with both GAGAS and another set 
of standards, such as those listed in paragraphs 2.13, 2.15, 6.01, and 
7.01, auditors should refer to paragraph 2.17 for the requirements for 
citing compliance with GAGAS. In addition to citing GAGAS, auditors 
may also cite the use of other standards in their reports when they 
have also met the requirements for citing compliance with the other 
standards. Auditors should refer to the other set of standards for the 
basis for citing compliance with those standards. 



 

Application Guidance: Relationship between GAGAS and Other 
Professional Standards 

2.12 Auditors may use GAGAS in conjunction with professional standards 
issued by other authoritative bodies. 

2.13 The relationship between GAGAS and other professional standards 
for financial audits, attestation engagements, and reviews of financial 
statements is as follows: 

a. The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) 
has established professional standards that apply to financial 
audits, attestation engagements, and reviews of financial 
statements for nonissuers (entities other than issuers under the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002,14 such as privately held companies, 


14See the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-204) for a discussion of issuers 
(generally, publicly traded companies with a reporting obligation under the Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934). 


nonprofit entities, and government entities) conducted by certified 
public accountants (CPA). For financial audits and attestation 
engagements, GAGAS incorporates by reference AICPA 
Statements on Auditing Standards and Statements on Standards 
for Attestation Engagements.15 For reviews of financial 
statements, GAGAS incorporates by reference AR-C, section 90, 
Review of Financial Statements.16 
b. The International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board 
(IAASB) has established professional standards that apply to 
financial audits and assurance engagements. Auditors may elect 
to use the IAASB standards and the related International 
Standards on Auditing and International Standards on Assurance 
Engagements in conjunction with GAGAS. 
c. The Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) has 
established professional standards that apply to financial audits 
and attestation engagements for issuers. Auditors may elect to 
use the PCAOB standards in conjunction with GAGAS. 


15AICPA, Professional Standards. 

16AICPA, Professional Standards. 

2.14 For financial audits, attestation engagements, and reviews of 
financial statements, GAGAS does not incorporate the AICPA Code of 
Professional Conduct by reference, but recognizes that certain CPAs may 
use or may be required to use the code in conjunction with GAGAS. 

2.15 For performance audits, GAGAS does not incorporate other 
standards by reference, but recognizes that auditors may use or may be 
required to use other professional standards in conjunction with GAGAS, 
such as the following: 

a. International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal 
Auditing, Institute of Internal Auditors, Inc.; 
b. International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions, 
International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions; 
c. Guiding Principles for Evaluators, American Evaluation 
Association; 



d. The Program Evaluation Standards, Joint Committee on 
Standards for Education Evaluation; 
e. Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing, American 
Psychological Association; and 
f. IT Standards, Guidelines, and Tools and Techniques for Audit and 
Assurance and Control Professionals, Information Systems Audit 
and Control Association. 


 

Stating Compliance 
with GAGAS in the 
Audit Report 




Requirements: Stating Compliance with GAGAS in the Audit 
Report 

2.16 When auditors are required to conduct an engagement in 
accordance with GAGAS or are representing to others that they did so, 
they should cite compliance with GAGAS in the audit report as set forth 
in paragraphs 2.17 through 2.19. 

2.17 Auditors should include one of the following types of GAGAS 
compliance statements in reports on GAGAS engagements, as 
appropriate. 

a. Unmodified GAGAS compliance statement: Stating that the 
auditors conducted the engagement in accordance with 
GAGAS. Auditors should include an unmodified GAGAS 
compliance statement in the audit report when they have 
(1) followed unconditional and applicable presumptively 
mandatory GAGAS requirements or (2) followed unconditional 
requirements, documented justification for any departures from 
applicable presumptively mandatory requirements, and 
achieved the objectives of those requirements through other 
means. 
b. Modified GAGAS compliance statement: Stating either that 
(1) the auditors conducted the engagement in accordance 
with GAGAS, except for specific applicable 
requirements that were not followed, or 
(2) because of the significance of the departure(s) from the 




 




requirements, the auditors were unable to and did not 
conduct the engagement in accordance with GAGAS. 


2.18 When auditors use a modified GAGAS statement, they should 
disclose in the report the applicable requirement(s) not followed, the 
reasons for not following the requirement(s), and how not following the 
requirement(s) affected or could have affected the engagement and 
the assurance provided. 

2.19 When auditors do not comply with applicable requirement(s), they 
should (1) assess the significance of the noncompliance to the 
engagement objectives; (2) document the assessment, along with their 
reasons for not following the requirement(s); and (3) determine the 
type of GAGAS compliance statement. 



 

Application Guidance: Stating Compliance with GAGAS in the Audit 
Report 

2.20 Situations for using modified compliance statements include scope 
limitations, such as restrictions on access to records, government 
officials, or other individuals needed to conduct the engagement. 

2.21 The auditors’ determination of noncompliance with applicable 
requirements is a matter of professional judgment, which is affected by 
the significance of the requirement(s) not followed in relation to the 
engagement objectives. 

2.22 Determining whether an unmodified or modified GAGAS compliance 
statement is appropriate is based on the consideration of the individual 
and aggregate effect of the instances of noncompliance with GAGAS 
requirements. Factors that the auditor may consider include 

a. the pervasiveness of the instance(s) of noncompliance; 
b. the potential effect of the instance(s) of noncompliance on the 
sufficiency and appropriateness of evidence supporting the 
findings, conclusions, and recommendations; and 
c. whether report users might misunderstand the implications of a 
modified or unmodified GAGAS compliance statement. 



2.23 If an audit report is issued in situations described in paragraph 3.60 
(except in circumstances discussed in paragraphs 3.25 or 3.84), a 
modified GAGAS compliance statement as discussed in paragraph 
2.17b(2) is used. 


Chapter 3: Ethics, Independence, and 
Professional Judgment 



3.01 The first section of this chapter sets forth fundamental ethical 
principles for auditors in the government environment. The second 
section establishes independence standards and provides guidance on 
this topic for auditors conducting financial audits, attestation 
engagements, reviews of financial statements, and performance audits 
under generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS). This 
section emphasizes the importance of independence of the auditor and 
the audit organization. The third section establishes the standard for the 
auditor’s use of professional judgment and provides related application 
guidance. The requirements of this chapter are intended to be followed in 
conjunction with all other applicable GAGAS requirements. 

 


Ethical Principles 



3.02 The ethical principles presented in this section provide the 
foundation, discipline, and structure, as well as the environment, that 
influence the application of GAGAS.17 

17See para. 5.08 for a discussion of ethical requirements in an audit organization’s system 
of quality control. 

18See paras. 3.18 through 3.108 for requirements and guidance related to independence. 

19See paras. 4.02 through 4.15 for additional information on competence. 

3.03 Because auditing is essential to government accountability to the 
public, the public expects audit organizations and auditors who perform 
their work in accordance with GAGAS to follow ethical principles. 
Management of the audit organization sets the tone for ethical behavior 
throughout the organization by maintaining an ethical culture, clearly 
communicating acceptable behavior and expectations to each employee, 
and creating an environment that reinforces and encourages ethical 
behavior throughout all levels of the organization. The ethical tone 
maintained and demonstrated by management and personnel is an 
essential element of a positive ethical environment for the audit 
organization. 

3.04 Performing audit work in accordance with ethical principles is a 
matter of personal and organizational responsibility. Ethical principles 
apply in preserving auditor independence,18 taking on only work that the 
audit organization is competent to perform,19 performing high-quality 
work, and following the applicable standards cited in the audit report. 
Integrity and objectivity are maintained when auditors perform their work 


and make decisions that are consistent with the broader interest of those 
relying on the audit report, including the public. 

3.05 Other ethical requirements or codes of professional conduct may 
also be applicable to auditors who conduct engagements in accordance 
with GAGAS. For example, individual auditors who are members of 
professional organizations or are licensed or certified professionals may 
also be subject to ethical requirements of those professional 
organizations or licensing bodies. Auditors employed by government 
entities may also be subject to government ethics laws and regulations. 

3.06 The ethical principles that guide the work of auditors who conduct 
engagements in accordance with GAGAS are 

a. the public interest; 
b. integrity; 
c. objectivity; 
d. proper use of government information, resources, and positions; 
and 
e. professional behavior. 


 


The Public Interest 



3.07 The public interest is defined as the collective well-being of the 
community of people and entities that the auditors serve. Observing 
integrity, objectivity, and independence in discharging their professional 
responsibilities helps auditors serve the public interest and honor the 
public trust. The principle of the public interest is fundamental to the 
responsibilities of auditors and critical in the government environment. 

3.08 A distinguishing mark of an auditor is acceptance of responsibility to 
serve the public interest. This responsibility is critical when auditing in the 
government environment. GAGAS embodies the concept of accountability 
for public resources, which is fundamental to serving the public interest. 

 

Integrity 




3.09 Public confidence in government is maintained and strengthened by 
auditors performing their professional responsibilities with integrity. 
Integrity includes auditors performing their work with an attitude that is 
objective, fact-based, nonpartisan, and nonideological with regard to 


audited entities and users of the audit reports. Within the constraints of 
applicable confidentiality laws, regulations, or policies, communications 
with the audited entity, those charged with governance, and the 
individuals contracting for or requesting the engagement are expected to 
be honest, candid, and constructive. 

3.10 Making decisions consistent with the public interest of the program 
or activity under audit is an important part of the principle of integrity. In 
discharging their professional responsibilities, auditors may encounter 
conflicting pressures from management of the audited entity, various 
levels of government, and other likely users. Auditors may also encounter 
pressures to inappropriately achieve personal or organizational gain. In 
resolving those conflicts and pressures, acting with integrity means that 
auditors place priority on their responsibilities to the public interest. 

 

Objectivity 




3.11 Auditors’ objectivity in discharging their professional responsibilities 
is the basis for the credibility of auditing in the government sector. 
Objectivity includes independence of mind and appearance when 
conducting engagements, maintaining an attitude of impartiality, having 
intellectual honesty, and being free of conflicts of interest. Maintaining 
objectivity includes a continuing assessment of relationships with audited 
entities and other stakeholders in the context of the auditors’ 
responsibility to the public. The concepts of objectivity and independence 
are closely related. Independence impairments affect auditors’ 
objectivity.20 

20See paras. 3.18 through 3.108 for independence requirements and guidance. 

 

Proper Use of 
Government Information, 
Resources, and Positions 




3.12 Government information, resources, and positions are to be used for 
official purposes and not inappropriately for the auditors’ personal gain or 
in a manner contrary to law or detrimental to the legitimate interests of the 
audited entity or the audit organization. This concept includes the proper 
handling of sensitive or classified information or resources. 

3.13 In the government environment, the public’s right to the transparency 
of government information has to be balanced with the proper use of that 
information. In addition, many government programs are subject to laws 
and regulations dealing with the disclosure of information. Exercising 
discretion in using information acquired in the course of auditors’ duties is 


an important part in achieving this balance. Improperly disclosing any 
such information to third parties is not an acceptable practice. 

3.14 Accountability to the public for the proper use and prudent 
management of government resources is an essential part of auditors’ 
responsibilities. Protecting and conserving government resources and 
using them appropriately for authorized activities are important elements 
of the public’s expectations for auditors. 

3.15 Misusing the auditor position for financial gain or other benefits 
violates an auditor’s fundamental responsibilities. An auditor’s credibility 
can be damaged by actions that could be perceived by an objective third 
party with knowledge of the relevant information as improperly benefiting 
an auditor’s personal financial interests or those of an immediate or close 
family member; a general partner; an entity for which the auditor serves 
as an officer, director, trustee, or employee; or an entity with which the 
auditor is negotiating concerning future employment. 

 

Professional Behavior 




3.16 High expectations for the auditing profession include complying with 
all relevant legal, regulatory, and professional obligations and avoiding 
any conduct that could bring discredit to auditors’ work, including actions 
that would cause an objective third party with knowledge of the relevant 
information to conclude that the auditors’ work was professionally 
deficient. Professional behavior includes auditors putting forth an honest 
effort in performing their duties in accordance with the relevant technical 
and professional standards. 

 

Independence 




3.17 GAGAS’s practical consideration of independence consists of four 
interrelated sections, providing 

a. general requirements and application guidance; 
b. requirements for and guidance on a conceptual framework for 
making independence determinations based on facts and 
circumstances that are often unique to specific environments; 
c. requirements for and guidance on independence for auditors 
providing nonaudit services, including identification of specific 
nonaudit services that always impair independence and others 
that would not normally impair independence; and 



d. requirements for and guidance on documentation necessary to 
support adequate consideration of auditor independence. 


Requirements: General 

3.18 In all matters relating to the GAGAS engagement, auditors and 
audit organizations must be independent from an audited entity. 

3.19 Auditors and audit organizations should avoid situations that could 
lead reasonable and informed third parties to conclude that the auditors 
and audit organizations are not independent and thus are not capable 
of exercising objective and impartial judgment on all issues associated 
with conducting the engagement and reporting on the work. 

3.20 Except under the limited circumstances discussed in paragraphs 
3.66 and 3.67, auditors and audit organizations should be independent 
from an audited entity during 

a. any period of time that falls within the period covered by the 
financial statements or subject matter of the engagement and 
b. the period of professional engagement. 




 

Application Guidance: General 

3.21 Independence comprises the following: 

a. Independence of mind: The state of mind that permits the conduct 
of an engagement without being affected by influences that 
compromise professional judgment, thereby allowing an individual 
to act with integrity and exercise objectivity and professional 
skepticism. 
b. Independence in appearance: The absence of circumstances that 
would cause a reasonable and informed third party to reasonably 
conclude that the integrity, objectivity, or professional skepticism 
of an audit organization or member of the engagement team had 
been compromised. 


3.22 Auditors and audit organizations maintain their independence so that 
their opinions, findings, conclusions, judgments, and recommendations 


will be impartial and will be viewed as impartial by reasonable and 
informed third parties. 

3.23 The period of professional engagement begins when the auditors 
either sign an initial engagement letter or other agreement to conduct an 
engagement or begin to conduct an engagement, whichever is earlier. 
The period lasts for the duration of the professional relationship—which, 
for recurring engagements, could cover many periods—and ends with the 
formal or informal notification, either by the auditors or the audited entity, 
of the termination of the professional relationship or with the issuance of a 
report, whichever is later. Accordingly, the period of professional 
engagement does not necessarily end with the issuance of a report and 
recommence with the beginning of the following year’s engagement or a 
subsequent engagement with a similar objective. 

3.24 Under some conditions, the party requesting or requiring an 
engagement, referred to as the engaging party, will differ from the party 
responsible for the engagement’s subject matter, referred to as the 
responsible party. Under such conditions, the GAGAS independence 
requirements apply to the relationship between the auditors and the 
responsible party, not the relationship between the auditors and the 
engaging party. The following are examples of conditions under which the 
party requesting an engagement may differ from the party responsible for 
the engagement’s subject matter. 

a. A legislative body requires that auditors conduct, on the legislative 
body’s behalf, a performance audit of program operations that are 
the responsibility of an executive agency. GAGAS requires that 
the auditors be independent of the executive agency. 
b. A state agency engages an independent public accountant to 
conduct an examination-level attestation engagement to assess 
the validity of certain information that a local government provided 
to the state agency. GAGAS requires that the independent public 
accountant be independent of the local government. 
c. A government department works with a government agency that 
conducts examination-level attestation engagements of contractor 
compliance with the terms and conditions of agreements between 
the department and the contractor. GAGAS requires that the 
auditors be independent of the contractors. 



3.25 Auditors in government sometimes work under conditions that impair 
independence in accordance with this section. An example of such a 
circumstance is a threat created by a statutory requirement for auditors to 
serve in official roles that conflict with the independence requirements of 
this section, such as a law that requires an auditor to serve as a voting 
member of an entity’s management committee or board of directors, for 
which there are no safeguards to eliminate or reduce the threats to an 
acceptable level. Paragraph 2.17b provides standard language for 
modified GAGAS compliance statements for auditors who experience 
such impairments. Determining how to modify the GAGAS compliance 
statement in these circumstances is a matter of professional judgment. 

 

GAGAS Conceptual 
Framework Approach to 
Independence 




3.26 Many different circumstances, or combinations of circumstances, are 
relevant in evaluating threats to independence. Therefore, GAGAS 
establishes a conceptual framework that auditors use to identify, 
evaluate, and apply safeguards to address threats to independence. The 
conceptual framework assists auditors in maintaining both independence 
of mind and independence in appearance. It can be applied to many 
variations in circumstances that create threats to independence and 
allows auditors to address threats to independence that result from 
activities that are not specifically prohibited by GAGAS. 

Requirements: GAGAS Conceptual Framework Approach to 
Independence 

3.27 Auditors should apply the conceptual framework21 at the audit 
organization, engagement team, and individual auditor levels to 

a. identify threats to independence; 
b. evaluate the significance of the threats identified, both 
individually and in the aggregate; and 
c. apply safeguards as necessary to eliminate the threats or 
reduce them to an acceptable level. 


3.28 Auditors should reevaluate threats to independence, including 



21See fig. 1 at the end of ch. 3 for a flowchart on applying the conceptual framework in 
accordance with GAGAS. 


any safeguards applied, whenever the audit organization or the 
auditors become aware of new information or changes in facts and 
circumstances that could affect whether a threat has been eliminated 
or reduced to an acceptable level. 

3.29 Auditors should use professional judgment when applying the 
conceptual framework. 

3.30 Auditors should evaluate the following broad categories of threats 
to independence when applying the GAGAS conceptual framework: 

a. Self-interest threat: The threat that a financial or other interest 
will inappropriately influence an auditor’s judgment or behavior. 
b. Self-review threat: The threat that an auditor or audit 
organization that has provided nonaudit services will not 
appropriately evaluate the results of previous judgments made 
or services provided as part of the nonaudit services when 
forming a judgment significant to a GAGAS engagement. 
c. Bias threat: The threat that an auditor will, as a result of 
political, ideological, social, or other convictions, take a position 
that is not objective. 
d. Familiarity threat: The threat that aspects of a relationship with 
management or personnel of an audited entity, such as a close 
or long relationship, or that of an immediate or close family 
member, will lead an auditor to take a position that is not 
objective. 
e. Undue influence threat: The threat that influences or pressures 
from sources external to the audit organization will affect an 
auditor’s ability to make objective judgments. 
f. Management participation threat: The threat that results from 
an auditor’s taking on the role of management or otherwise 
performing management functions on behalf of the audited 
entity, which will lead an auditor to take a position that is not 
objective. 
g. Structural threat: The threat that an audit organization’s 
placement within a government entity, in combination with the 





structure of the government entity being audited, will affect the 
audit organization’s ability to perform work and report results 
objectively. 


3.31 Auditors should determine whether identified threats to 
independence are at an acceptable level or have been eliminated or 
reduced to an acceptable level, considering both qualitative and 
quantitative factors to determine the significance of a threat. 

3.32 When auditors determine that threats to independence are not at 
an acceptable level, the auditors should determine whether 
appropriate safeguards can be applied to eliminate the threats or 
reduce them to an acceptable level. 

3.33 In cases where auditors determine that threats to independence 
require the application of safeguards, auditors should document the 
threats identified and the safeguards applied to eliminate or reduce the 
threats to an acceptable level. 

3.34 If auditors initially identify a threat to independence after the audit 
report is issued, auditors should evaluate the threat’s effect on the 
engagement and on GAGAS compliance. If the auditors determine that 
the newly identified threat’s effect on the engagement would have 
resulted in the audit report being different from the report issued had 
the auditors been aware of it, they should communicate in the same 
manner as that used to originally distribute the report to those charged 
with governance, the appropriate officials of the audited entity, the 
appropriate officials of the audit organization requiring or arranging for 
the engagements, and other known users, so that they do not continue 
to rely on findings or conclusions that were affected by the threat to 
independence. If auditors previously posted the report to their publicly 
accessible website, they should remove the report and post a public 
notification that the report was removed. The auditors should then 
determine whether to perform the additional engagement work 
necessary to reissue the report, including any revised findings or 
conclusions, or to repost the original report if the additional 
engagement work does not result in a change in findings or 
conclusions. 



 


Application Guidance: GAGAS Conceptual Framework Approach to 
Independence 

3.35 For consideration of auditor independence, offices or units of an 
audit organization, or related or affiliated entities under common control, 
are not differentiated from one another. Consequently, for the purposes of 
evaluating independence using the conceptual framework, an audit 
organization that includes multiple offices or units, or includes multiple 
entities related or affiliated through common control, is considered to be 
one audit organization. Common ownership may also affect 
independence in appearance regardless of the level of control. 

Identifying Threats 

3.36 Facts and circumstances that create threats to independence can 
result from events such as the start of a new engagement, assignment of 
new personnel to an ongoing engagement, and acceptance of a nonaudit 
service for an audited entity. 

3.37 Threats to independence may be created by a wide range of 
relationships and circumstances. Circumstances that result in a threat to 
independence in one of the categories may result in other threats as well. 

3.38 Examples of circumstances that create self-interest threats for an 
auditor follow: 

a. An audit organization having undue dependence on income from 
a particular audited entity. 
b. A member of the audit team entering into employment 
negotiations with an audited entity. 
c. An audit organization discovering a significant error when 
evaluating the results of a previous professional service provided 
by the audit organization. 
d. A member of the audit team having a direct financial interest in the 
audited entity. However, this would not preclude auditors from 
auditing pension plans that they participate in if (1) the auditors 
have no control over the investment strategy, benefits, or other 
management issues associated with the pension plan and (2) the 
auditors belong to such pension plan as part of their employment 
with the audit organization or prior employment with the audited 



entity, provided that the plan is normally offered to all employees 
in equivalent employment positions. 


3.39 Examples of circumstances that create self-review threats for an 
auditor follow: 

a. An audit organization issuing a report on the effectiveness of the 
operation of financial or performance management systems after 
designing or implementing the systems. 
b. An audit organization having prepared the original data used to 
generate records that are the subject matter of the engagement. 
c. An audit organization providing a service for an audited entity that 
directly affects the subject matter information of the engagement. 
d. A member of the engagement team being, or having recently 
been, employed by the audited entity in a position to exert 
significant influence over the subject matter of the engagement. 


3.40 Examples of circumstances that create bias threats for an auditor 
follow: 

a. A member of the engagement team having preconceptions about 
the objectives of a program under audit that are strong enough to 
affect the auditor’s objectivity. 
b. A member of the engagement team having biases associated with 
political, ideological, or social convictions that result from 
membership or employment in, or loyalty to, a particular type of 
policy, group, entity, or level of government that could affect the 
auditor’s objectivity. 


3.41 Examples of circumstances that create familiarity threats for an 
auditor follow: 

a. A member of the engagement team having a close or immediate 
family member who is a principal or senior manager of the audited 
entity. 
b. A member of the engagement team having a close or immediate 
family member who is an employee of the audited entity and is in 



a position to exert significant influence over the subject matter of 
the engagement. 
c. A principal or employee of the audited entity having recently 
served on the engagement team in a position to exert significant 
influence over the subject matter of the engagement. 
d. An auditor accepting gifts or preferential treatment from an audited 
entity, unless the value is trivial or inconsequential. 
e. Senior engagement personnel having a long association with the 
audited entity. 


3.42 Examples of circumstances that create undue influence threats for 
an auditor or audit organization include existence of the following: 

a. External interference or influence that could improperly limit or 
modify the scope of an engagement or threaten to do so, including 
exerting pressure to inappropriately reduce the extent of work 
performed in order to reduce costs or fees. 
b. External interference with the selection or application of 
engagement procedures or in the selection of transactions to be 
examined. 
c. Unreasonable restrictions on the time allowed to complete an 
engagement or issue the report. 
d. External interference over assignment, appointment, 
compensation, and promotion. 
e. Restrictions on funds or other resources provided to the audit 
organization that adversely affect the audit organization’s ability to 
carry out its responsibilities. 
f. Authority to overrule or to inappropriately influence the auditors’ 
judgment as to the appropriate content of the report. 
g. Threat of replacing the auditor or the audit organization based on 
a disagreement with the contents of an audit report, the auditors’ 
conclusions, or the application of an accounting principle or other 
criteria. 



h. Influences that jeopardize the auditors’ continued employment for 
reasons other than incompetence, misconduct, or the audited 
entity’s need for GAGAS engagements. 


3.43 Examples of circumstances that create management participation 
threats for an auditor follow: 

a. A member of the engagement team being, or having recently 
been, a principal or senior manager of the audited entity. 
b. An auditor serving as a voting member of an entity’s management 
committee or board of directors, making policy decisions that 
affect future direction and operation of an entity’s programs, 
supervising entity employees, developing or approving 
programmatic policy, authorizing an entity’s transactions, or 
maintaining custody of an entity’s assets. 
c. An auditor or audit organization recommending a single individual 
for a specific position that is key to the audited entity or program 
under audit, or otherwise ranking or influencing management’s 
selection of the candidate. 
d. An auditor preparing management’s corrective action plan to deal 
with deficiencies detected in the engagement. 


3.44 Examples of circumstances that create structural threats for an 
auditor follow: 

a. For both external and internal audit organizations, structural 
placement of the audit function within the reporting line of the 
areas under audit. 
b. For internal audit organizations, administrative direction from the 
audited entity’s management. 


Evaluating Threats 

3.45 Threats to independence are evaluated both individually and in the 
aggregate, as threats can have a cumulative effect on auditors’ 
independence. 

3.46 When evaluating threats to independence, an acceptable level is a 
level at which a reasonable and informed third party would likely conclude 


that the audit organization or auditor is independent. The concept of a 
reasonable and informed third party is a test that involves an evaluation 
by a hypothetical person. Such a person possesses skills, knowledge, 
and experience to objectively evaluate the appropriateness of the 
auditor’s judgments and conclusions. This evaluation entails weighing all 
the relevant facts and circumstances, including any safeguards applied, 
that the auditor knows, or could reasonably be expected to know, at the 
time that the evaluation is made. 

3.47 A threat to independence is not at an acceptable level if it either 

a. could affect the auditors’ ability to conduct an engagement without 
being affected by influences that compromise professional 
judgment or 
b. could expose the auditors or audit organization to circumstances 
that would cause a reasonable and informed third party to 
conclude that the integrity, objectivity, or professional skepticism 
of the audit organization, or an auditor, had been compromised. 


3.48 The GAGAS section on nonaudit services in paragraphs 3.64 
through 3.106 provides requirements and guidance on evaluating threats 
to independence related to nonaudit services that auditors provide to 
audited entities. That section also enumerates specific nonaudit services 
that always impair auditor independence with respect to audited entities 
and that auditors are prohibited from providing to audited entities. 

Applying Safeguards 

3.49 Safeguards are actions or other measures, individually or in 
combination, that auditors and audit organizations take that effectively 
eliminate threats to independence or reduce them to an acceptable level. 
Safeguards vary depending on the facts and circumstances. 

3.50 Examples of safeguards include 

a. consulting an independent third party, such as a professional 
organization, a professional regulatory body, or another auditor to 
discuss engagement issues or assess issues that are highly 
technical or that require significant judgment; 
b. involving another audit organization to perform or re-perform part 
of the engagement; 



c. having an auditor who was not a member of the engagement team 
review the work performed; and 
d. removing an auditor from an engagement team when that 
auditor’s financial or other interests or relationships pose a threat 
to independence. 


3.51 The lists of safeguards in 3.50 and 3.69 cannot provide safeguards 
for all circumstances. They may, however, provide a starting point for 
auditors who have identified threats to independence and are considering 
what safeguards could eliminate those threats or reduce them to an 
acceptable level. In some cases, multiple safeguards may be necessary 
to address a threat. 

Audit Organizations in Government Entities 

3.52 The ability of an audit organization structurally located in a 
government entity to perform work and report the results objectively can 
be affected by its placement within the government entity and the 
structure of the government entity being audited. The independence 
standard applies to auditors in both external audit organizations (reporting 
to third parties externally or to both internal and external parties) and 
internal audit organizations (reporting only to senior management within 
the audited entity). Such audit organizations are often subject to 
constitutional or statutory safeguards that mitigate the effects of structural 
threats to independence. 

3.53 For external audit organizations, constitutional or statutory 
safeguards that mitigate the effects of structural threats to independence 
may include governmental structures under which a government audit 
organization is 

a. at a level of government other than the one of which the audited 
entity is part (federal, state, or local)—for example, federal 
auditors auditing a state government program—or 
b. placed within a different branch of government from that of the 
audited entity—for example, legislative auditors auditing an 
executive branch program. 


3.54 Safeguards other than those described in paragraph 3.53 may 
mitigate threats resulting from governmental structures. For external audit 
organizations, structural threats may be mitigated if the head of the audit 


organization meets any of the following criteria in accordance with 
constitutional or statutory requirements: 

a. directly elected by voters of the jurisdiction being audited; 
b. elected or appointed by a legislative body, subject to removal by a 
legislative body, and reporting the results of engagements to and 
accountable to a legislative body; 
c. appointed by someone other than a legislative body, so long as 
the appointment is confirmed by a legislative body and removal 
from the position is subject to oversight or approval by a legislative 
body, and reports the results of engagements to and is 
accountable to a legislative body; or 
d. appointed by, accountable to, reports to, and can only be removed 
by a statutorily created governing body, the majority of whose 
members are independently elected or appointed and are outside 
the organization being audited. 


3.55 In addition to the criteria in paragraphs 3.53 and 3.54, GAGAS 
recognizes that there may be other organizational structures under which 
external audit organizations in government entities could be considered 
independent. If appropriately designed and implemented, these structures 
provide safeguards that prevent the audited entity from interfering with the 
audit organization’s ability to perform the work and report the results 
impartially. An external audit organization may be structurally 
independent under a structure different from the ones listed in paragraphs 
3.53 and 3.54 if the government audit organization is subject to all of the 
following constitutional or statutory provisions. The following constitutional 
or statutory provisions may also be used as safeguards to augment those 
listed in paragraphs 3.53 and 3.54: 

a. protections that prevent the audited entity from abolishing the 
audit organization; 
b. protections requiring that if the head of the audit organization is 
removed from office, the head of the agency reports this fact and 
the reasons for the removal to the legislative body; 
c. protections that prevent the audited entity from interfering with the 
initiation, scope, timing, and completion of any engagement; 



d. protections that prevent the audited entity from interfering with 
audit reporting, including the findings and conclusions or the 
manner, means, or timing of the audit organization’s reports; 
e. protections that require the audit organization to report to a 
legislative body or other independent governing body on a 
recurring basis; 
f. protections that give the audit organization sole authority over the 
selection, retention, advancement, and dismissal of its personnel; 
and 
g. access to records and documents related to the agency, program, 
or function being audited and access to government officials or 
other individuals as needed to conduct the engagement. 


3.56 Government internal auditors who work under the direction of the 
audited entity’s management are considered structurally independent for 
the purposes of reporting internally, if the head of the audit organization 
meets all of the following criteria: 

a. is accountable to the head or deputy head of the government 
entity or to those charged with governance; 
b. reports the engagement results both to the head or deputy head of 
the government entity and to those charged with governance; 
c. is located organizationally outside the staff or line management 
function of the unit under audit; 
d. has access to those charged with governance; and 
e. is sufficiently removed from pressures to conduct engagements 
and report findings, opinions, and conclusions objectively without 
fear of reprisal. 


Internal Auditors 

3.57 Certain entities employ auditors to work for entity management. 
These auditors may be subject to administrative direction from persons 
involved in the entity management process. Such audit organizations are 
internal audit functions and are encouraged to use the Institute of Internal 


Auditors’ International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal 
Auditing, in conjunction with GAGAS. 

3.58 When an internal audit organization conducts engagements 
pertaining to external parties, such as contractors or entities subject to 
other outside agreements, and no impairments to independence exist, the 
audit organization can be considered independent as an external audit 
organization of those external parties. 

Requirements: Independence Impairments 

3.59 Auditors should conclude that independence is impaired if no 
safeguards have been effectively applied to eliminate an unacceptable 
threat or reduce it to an acceptable level. 

3.60 When auditors conclude that independence of the engagement 
team or the audit organization is impaired under paragraph 3.59, 
auditors should decline to accept an engagement or should terminate 
an engagement in progress (except in circumstances discussed in 
paragraphs 3.25 or 3.84). 



 

Application Guidance: Independence Impairments 

3.61 Whether independence is impaired depends on the nature of the 
threat, whether the threat is of such significance that it would compromise 
an auditor’s professional judgment or create the appearance that the 
auditor’s integrity, objectivity, or professional skepticism may be 
compromised, and the specific safeguards applied to eliminate the threat 
or reduce it to an acceptable level. 

3.62 If auditors conclude that an individual auditor’s independence is 
impaired under paragraph 3.59, it may be necessary to terminate the 
engagement or it may be possible to take action that satisfactorily 
addresses the effect of the individual auditor’s independence impairment. 

3.63 Factors that are relevant in evaluating whether the independence of 
the engagement team or the audit organization is impaired by an 
individual auditor’s independence impairment include 

a. the nature and duration of the individual auditor’s impairment; 



b. the number and nature of any previous impairments with respect 
to the current engagement; 
c. whether a member of the engagement team had knowledge of the 
interest or relationship that caused the individual auditor’s 
impairment; 
d. whether the individual auditor whose independence is impaired is 
(1) a member of the engagement team or (2) another individual for 
whom there are independence requirements; 
e. the role of the individual auditor on the engagement team whose 
independence is impaired; 
f. the effect of the service, if any, on the accounting records or 
audited entity’s financial statements if the individual auditor’s 
impairment was caused by the provision of a nonaudit service; 
g. whether a partner or director of the audit organization had 
knowledge of the individual auditor’s impairment and failed to 
ensure that the individual auditor’s impairment was promptly 
communicated to an appropriate individual within the audit 
organization; and 
h. the extent of the self-interest, undue influence, or other threats 
created by the individual auditor’s impairment. 


 

Provision of Nonaudit 
Services to Audited 
Entities 




Requirement: Nonaudit Services 

3.64 Before auditors agree to provide a nonaudit service to an audited 
entity, they should determine whether providing such a service would 
create a threat to independence, either by itself or in aggregate with 
other nonaudit services provided, with respect to any GAGAS 
engagement they conduct. 



 

Application Guidance: Nonaudit Services 

3.65 Auditors have traditionally provided a range of nonaudit services that 
are consistent with their skills and expertise. Providing nonaudit services 
to audited entities may create threats to the independence of auditors or 
audit organizations. 


3.66 For performance audits and agreed-upon procedures engagements, 
nonaudit services that are otherwise prohibited by GAGAS may be 
provided when such services do not relate to the specific subject matter 
of the engagement. 

3.67 For financial audits, examination or review engagements, and 
reviews of financial statements, a nonaudit service otherwise prohibited 
by GAGAS and provided during the period covered by the financial 
statements may not threaten independence with respect to those financial 
statements provided that the following conditions exist: 

a. the nonaudit service was provided prior to the period of 
professional engagement; 
b. the nonaudit service related only to periods prior to the period 
covered by the financial statements; and 
c. the financial statements for the period to which the nonaudit 
service did relate were audited by other auditors (or in the case of 
an examination, review, or review of financial statements, 
examined, reviewed, or audited by other auditors as appropriate). 


3.68 Nonaudit services that auditors provide can affect independence of 
mind and in appearance in periods after the nonaudit services were 
provided. For example, if auditors have designed and implemented an 
accounting and financial reporting system that is expected to be in place 
for many years, a threat to independence in appearance may exist in 
subsequent periods for future engagements that those auditors conduct. 
For recurring engagements, having another independent audit 
organization conduct an engagement over the areas affected by the 
nonaudit service may provide a safeguard that allows the audit 
organization that provided the nonaudit service to mitigate the threat to its 
independence. 

3.69 The following are examples of actions that in certain circumstances 
could be safeguards in addressing threats to independence related to 
nonaudit services: 

a. not including individuals who provided the nonaudit service as 
engagement team members; 
b. having another auditor, not associated with the engagement, 
review the engagement and nonaudit work as appropriate; 



c. engaging another audit organization to evaluate the results of the 
nonaudit service; or 
d. having another audit organization re-perform the nonaudit service 
to the extent necessary to enable that other audit organization to 
take responsibility for the service. 


Routine Activities 

3.70 Routine activities that auditors perform related directly to conducting 
an engagement, such as providing advice and responding to questions as 
part of an engagement, are not considered nonaudit services under 
GAGAS. Such routine activities generally involve providing advice or 
assistance to the audited entity on an informal basis as part of an 
engagement. Routine activities typically are insignificant in terms of time 
incurred or resources expended and generally do not result in a specific 
project or engagement or in the auditors producing a formal report or 
other formal work product. However, activities such as financial statement 
preparation, cash-to-accrual conversions, and reconciliations are 
considered nonaudit services under GAGAS, not routine activities related 
to the performance of an engagement, and are evaluated using the 
conceptual framework as discussed in paragraphs 3.87 through 3.95. 

3.71 Routine activities directly related to an engagement may include the 
following: 

a. providing advice to the audited entity on an accounting matter as 
an ancillary part of the overall financial audit; 
b. providing advice to the audited entity on routine business matters; 
c. educating the audited entity about matters within the technical 
expertise of the auditors; and 
d. providing information to the audited entity that is readily available 
to the auditors, such as best practices and benchmarking studies. 


Other Services Provided by Government Audit Organizations 

3.72 Audit organizations in government entities frequently provide 
services that differ from the traditional professional services that an 
accounting or consulting firm provides to or for an audited entity. These 
types of services are often provided in response to a statutory 


requirement, at the discretion of the authority of the audit organization, or 
to an engaging party (such as a legislative oversight body or an 
independent external organization) rather than a responsible party, and 
would generally not create a threat to independence. Examples of these 
types of services include the following: 

a. providing information or data to a requesting party without auditor 
evaluation or verification of the information or data; 
b. developing standards, methodologies, audit guides, audit 
programs, or criteria for use throughout the government or for use 
in certain specified situations; 
c. collaborating with other professional organizations to advance 
auditing of government entities and programs; 
d. developing question and answer documents to promote 
understanding of technical issues or standards; 
e. providing assistance and technical expertise to legislative bodies 
or independent external organizations; 
f. assisting legislative bodies by developing questions for use at 
hearings; 
g. providing training, speeches, and technical presentations; 
h. providing assistance in reviewing budget submissions; 
i. contracting for audit services on behalf of an audited entity and 
overseeing the audit contract, as long as the overarching 
principles are not violated and the auditor under contract reports 
to the audit organization and not to management; and 
j. providing audit, investigative, and oversight-related services that 
do not involve a GAGAS engagement, such as 
(1) investigations of alleged fraud, violation of contract 
provisions or grant agreements, or abuse; 
(2) periodic audit recommendation follow-up engagements 
and reports; and 



(3) identifying best practices or leading practices for use in 
advancing the practices of government organizations. 


Requirements: Management Responsibilities 

3.73 Before auditors agree to provide nonaudit services to an audited 
entity that the audited entity’s management requested and that could 
create a threat to independence, either by themselves or in aggregate 
with other nonaudit services provided, with respect to any GAGAS 
engagement they conduct, auditors should determine that the audited 
entity has designated an individual who possesses suitable skill, 
knowledge, or experience and that the individual understands the 
services to be provided sufficiently to oversee them. 

3.74 Auditors should document consideration of management’s ability 
to effectively oversee nonaudit services to be provided. 

3.75 In cases where the audited entity is unable or unwilling to assume 
these responsibilities (for example, the audited entity does not have an 
individual with suitable skill, knowledge, or experience to oversee the 
nonaudit services provided, or is unwilling to perform such functions 
because of lack of time or desire), auditors should conclude that the 
provision of these services is an impairment to independence. 

3.76 Auditors providing nonaudit services to audited entities should 
obtain agreement from audited entity management that audited entity 
management performs the following functions in connection with the 
nonaudit services: 

a. assumes all management responsibilities; 
b. oversees the services, by designating an individual, preferably 
within senior management, who possesses suitable skill, 
knowledge, or experience; 
c. evaluates the adequacy and results of the services provided; 
and 
d. accepts responsibility for the results of the services. 


3.77 In connection with nonaudit services, auditors should establish 
and document their understanding with the audited entity’s 




management or those charged with governance, as appropriate, 
regarding the following: 

a. objectives of the nonaudit service, 
b. services to be provided, 
c. audited entity’s acceptance of its responsibilities as discussed 
in paragraph 3.76, 
d. the auditors’ responsibilities, and 
e. any limitations on the provision of nonaudit services. 


3.78 Auditors should conclude that management responsibilities that 
the auditors perform for an audited entity are impairments to 
independence. If the auditors were to assume management 
responsibilities for an audited entity, the management participation 
threats created would be so significant that no safeguards could 
reduce them to an acceptable level. 



 

Application Guidance: Management Responsibilities 

3.79 A critical component of determining whether a threat to 
independence exists is consideration of management’s ability to 
effectively oversee the nonaudit service to be provided. Although the 
responsible individual in management is required to have sufficient 
expertise to oversee the nonaudit services, management is not required 
to possess the expertise to perform or re-perform the services. However, 
indicators of management’s ability to effectively oversee the nonaudit 
service include management’s ability to determine the reasonableness of 
the results of the nonaudit services provided and to recognize a material 
error, omission, or misstatement in the results of the nonaudit services 
provided. 

3.80 Management responsibilities involve leading and directing an entity, 
including making decisions regarding the acquisition, deployment, and 
control of human, financial, physical, and intangible resources. 

3.81 The following are considered management responsibilities: 

a. setting policies and strategic direction for the audited entity; 



b. directing and accepting responsibility for the actions of the audited 
entity’s employees in the performance of their routine, recurring 
activities; 
c. having custody of an audited entity’s assets; 
d. reporting to those charged with governance on behalf of 
management; 
e. deciding which of the audit organization’s or outside third party’s 
recommendations to implement; 
f. accepting responsibility for the management of an audited entity’s 
project; 
g. accepting responsibility for designing, implementing, or 
maintaining internal control; 
h. providing services that are intended to be used as management’s 
primary basis for making decisions that are significant to the 
subject matter of the engagement; 
i. developing an audited entity’s performance measurement system 
when that system is material or significant to the subject matter of 
the engagement; and 
j. serving as a voting member of an audited entity’s management 
committee or board of directors. 


3.82 Whether a specific activity is a management responsibility as 
identified in paragraph 3.81 or otherwise depends on the facts and 
circumstances. 

Requirements: Providing Nonaudit Services 

3.83 Auditors who previously provided nonaudit services for an entity 
that is a prospective subject of an engagement should evaluate the 
effect of those nonaudit services on independence before agreeing to 
conduct a GAGAS engagement. If auditors provided a nonaudit 
service in the period to be covered by the engagement, they should 
(1) determine if GAGAS expressly prohibits the nonaudit service; (2) if 




audited entity management requested the nonaudit service, determine 
whether the skill, knowledge, or experience of the individual 
responsible for overseeing the nonaudit service was sufficient; and (3) 
determine whether a threat to independence exists and address any 
threats noted in accordance with the conceptual framework. 

3.84 Auditors in a government entity may be required to provide a 
nonaudit service that impairs the auditors’ independence with respect 
to a required engagement. If, because of constitutional or statutory 
requirements over which they have no control, the auditors can neither 
implement safeguards to reduce the resulting threat to an acceptable 
level nor decline to provide or terminate a nonaudit service that is 
incompatible with engagement responsibilities, auditors should 
disclose the nature of the threat that could not be eliminated or 
reduced to an acceptable level and modify the GAGAS compliance 
statement as discussed in paragraph 2.17b accordingly. Determining 
how to modify the GAGAS compliance statement in these 
circumstances is a matter of professional judgment. 



 

 

Consideration of Specific 
Nonaudit Services 




3.85 By their nature, certain nonaudit services directly support an entity’s 
operations and, if provided to an audited entity, create a threat to the 
auditors’ ability to maintain independence in mind and appearance. Some 
aspects of these services will impair auditors’ ability to conduct GAGAS 
engagements for the entities to which the services are provided. 

3.86 Auditors may be able to provide nonaudit services in the broad areas 
indicated in paragraphs 3.87 through 3.106 without impairing 
independence if (1) the nonaudit services are not expressly prohibited by 
GAGAS requirements, (2) the auditors have determined that the 
requirements for providing nonaudit services in paragraphs 3.73 through 
3.78 and paragraph 3.83 have been met, and (3) any significant threats to 
independence have been eliminated or reduced to an acceptable level 
through the application of safeguards. The conceptual framework enables 
auditors to evaluate independence given the facts and circumstances of 
individual services that are not specifically prohibited. 

 


Requirements: Preparing Accounting Records and Financial 
Statements 

3.87 Auditors should conclude that the following services involving 
preparation of accounting records impair independence with respect to 
an audited entity: 

a. determining or changing journal entries, account codes or 
classifications for transactions, or other accounting records for 
the entity without obtaining management’s approval; 
b. authorizing or approving the entity’s transactions; and 
c. preparing or making changes to source documents without 
management approval. 


3.88 Auditors should conclude that preparing financial statements in 
their entirety from a client-provided trial balance or underlying 
accounting records creates significant threats to auditors’ 
independence, and should document the threats and safeguards 
applied to eliminate and reduce threats to an acceptable level in 
accordance with paragraph 3.33 or decline to provide the services.22 

3.89 Auditors should identify as threats to independence any services 
related to preparing accounting records and financial statements, other 
than those defined as impairments to independence in paragraph 3.87 
and significant threats in paragraph 3.88. These services include 

a. recording transactions for which management has determined 
or approved the appropriate account classification, or posting 
coded transactions to an audited entity’s general ledger; 
b. preparing certain line items or sections of the financial 
statements based on information in the trial balance; 
c. posting entries that an audited entity’s management has 
approved to the entity’s trial balance; and 




22See fig. 2 at the end of ch. 3 for a flowchart on independence considerations for 
preparing accounting records and financial statements. 


d. preparing account reconciliations that identify reconciling items 
for the audited entity management’s evaluation. 


3.90 Auditors should evaluate the significance of threats to 
independence created by providing any services discussed in 
paragraph 3.89 and should document the evaluation of the significance 
of such threats.23 



23See para. 3.33 for additional requirements related to documenting threats identified and 
safeguards applied to eliminate or reduce threats to an acceptable level. 

 

Application Guidance: Preparing Accounting Records and Financial 
Statements 

3.91 Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation 
of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable financial 
reporting framework, even if the auditor assisted in drafting those financial 
statements. Consequently, an auditor accepting responsibility for the 
preparation and fair presentation of financial statements that the auditor 
will subsequently audit or that will otherwise be the subject matter of an 
engagement would impair the auditor’s independence. 

3.92 Source documents include those providing evidence that 
transactions have occurred (for example, purchase orders, payroll time 
records, customer orders, and contracts). Such records also include an 
audited entity’s general ledger and subsidiary records or equivalent. 

3.93 Determining whether services, as discussed in paragraph 3.89, are 
significant threats and require safeguards is a matter of professional 
judgment. 

3.94 Factors that are relevant in evaluating the significance of any threats 
created by providing services as discussed in paragraph 3.89 include 

a. the extent to which the outcome of the service could have a 
material effect on the financial statements, 
b. the degree of subjectivity involved in determining the appropriate 
amounts or treatment for those matters reflected in the financial 
statements, and 



c. the extent of the audited entity’s involvement in determining 
significant matters of judgment. 


3.95 Providing clerical assistance, such as typing, formatting, printing, 
and binding financial statements, is unlikely to be a significant threat. 

Requirement: Internal Audit Assistance Services Provided by 
External Auditors 

3.96 Internal audit assistance services involve assisting an entity in 
performing its internal audit activities. Auditors should conclude that 
the following internal audit assistance activities impair an external 
auditor’s independence with respect to an audited entity: 

a. setting internal audit policies or the strategic direction of internal 
audit activities; 
b. performing procedures that form part of the internal control, such 
as reviewing and approving changes to employee data access 
privileges; and 
c. determining the scope of the internal audit function and resulting 
work. 




 

Requirements: Internal Control Evaluation as a Nonaudit Service 

3.97 Auditors should conclude that providing or supervising ongoing 
monitoring procedures over an entity’s system of internal control 
impairs independence because the management participation threat 
created is so significant that no safeguards could reduce the threat to 
an acceptable level. 

3.98 Separate evaluations are sometimes provided as a nonaudit 
service. When providing separate evaluations as nonaudit services, 
auditors should evaluate the significance of the threat created by 
performing separate evaluations and apply safeguards when 
necessary to eliminate the threat or reduce it to an acceptable level. 



 


Application Guidance: Internal Control Evaluation as a Nonaudit 
Service 

3.99 Accepting responsibility for designing, implementing, or maintaining 
internal control includes accepting responsibility for designing, 
implementing, or maintaining monitoring procedures. Monitoring involves 
the use of either ongoing monitoring procedures or separate evaluations 
to gather and analyze persuasive information supporting conclusions 
about the effectiveness of the internal control system. Ongoing monitoring 
procedures performed on behalf of management are built into the routine, 
recurring operating activities of an entity. 

3.100 Factors relevant to evaluating the significance of any threats 
created by providing separate evaluations as a nonaudit service include 

a. the frequency of the separate evaluations and 
b. the scope or extent of the controls (in relation to the scope of the 
engagement conducted) being evaluated. 


3.101 A separate evaluation provided as a nonaudit service is not a 
substitute for engagement procedures in a GAGAS engagement. 

Requirement: Information Technology Services 

3.102 Auditors should conclude that providing information technology 
(IT) services to an audited entity that relate to the period under audit 
impairs independence if those services include 

a. designing or developing an audited entity’s financial information 
system or other IT system that will play a significant role in the 
management of an area of operations that is or will be the 
subject matter of an engagement; 
b. making other than insignificant modifications to source code 
underlying an audited entity’s existing financial information 
system or other IT system that will play a significant role in the 
management of an area of operations that is or will be the 
subject matter of an engagement; 


 




c. supervising audited entity personnel in the daily operation of an 
audited entity’s information system; or 
d. operating an audited entity’s network, financial information 
system, or other IT system that will play a significant role in the 
management of an area of operations that is or will be the 
subject matter of an engagement. 




 

Application Guidance: Information Technology Services 

3.103 Services related to IT systems include the design or 
implementation of hardware or software systems. The systems may 
aggregate source data, form part of the internal control over the subject 
matter of the engagement, or generate information that affects the subject 
matter of the engagement. 

Requirement: Appraisal, Valuation, and Actuarial Services 

3.104 Auditors should conclude that independence is impaired if an 
audit organization provides appraisal, valuation, or actuarial services to 
an audited entity when (1) the services involve a significant degree of 
subjectivity and (2) the results of the service, individually or when 
combined with other valuation, appraisal, or actuarial services, are 
material to the audited entity’s financial statements or other information 
on which the audit organization is reporting. 



 

Application Guidance: Appraisal, Valuation, and Actuarial Services 

3.105 A valuation comprises the making of assumptions with regard to 
future developments; the application of appropriate methodologies and 
techniques; and the combination of both to compute a certain value, or 
range of values, for an asset, a liability, or an entity as a whole. 

 


Requirement: Other Nonaudit Services 

3.106 Auditors should conclude that providing certain other nonaudit 
services impairs an external auditor’s independence with respect to an 
audited entity. These activities include the following: 

a. Advisory service 
(1) Assuming any management responsibilities 


b. Benefit plan administration 
(1) Making policy decisions on behalf of management 
(2) Interpreting the provisions in a plan document for a plan 
participant on behalf of management without first 
obtaining management’s concurrence 
(3) Making disbursements on behalf of the plan 
(4) Having custody of the plan’s assets 
(5) Serving in a fiduciary capacity, as defined under the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 197424 



c. Business risk consulting 
(1) Making or approving business risk decisions 
(2) Presenting business risk considerations to those 
charged with governance on behalf of management 



d. Executive or employee recruiting 
(1) Committing the audited entity to employee 
compensation or benefit arrangements 
(2) Hiring or terminating the audited entity’s employees 







24See Section 2510.3-21 of Title 29, Code of Federal Regulations. 


e. Investment advisory or management 
(1) Making investment decisions on behalf of management 
or otherwise having discretionary authority over an 
audited entity’s investments 
(2) Executing a transaction to buy or sell an audited entity’s 
investments 
(3) Having custody of an audited entity’s assets, such as 
taking temporary possession of securities 










 

 

Documentation 




Requirement: Documentation 

3.107 While insufficient documentation of an auditor’s compliance with 
the independence standard does not impair independence, auditors 
should prepare appropriate documentation under the GAGAS quality 
control and assurance requirements.25 The independence standard 
includes the following documentation requirements, where applicable: 

a. document threats to independence that require the application 
of safeguards, along with safeguards applied, in accordance 
with the conceptual framework for independence as required by 
paragraph 3.33; 
b. document the safeguards in paragraphs 3.52 through 3.56 if an 
audit organization is structurally located within a government 
entity and is considered structurally independent based on 
those safeguards; 
c. document consideration of audited entity management’s ability 
to effectively oversee a nonaudit service to be provided by the 
auditor as indicated in paragraph 3.74; 




25See para. 5.04 for additional discussion of documenting compliance with quality control 
policies and procedures and paras. 5.08 through 5.11 for additional discussion of policies 
and procedures on independence, legal, and ethical requirements. 


d. document the auditor’s understanding with an audited entity for 
which the auditor will provide a nonaudit service as indicated in 
paragraph 3.77; and 
e. document the evaluation of the significance of the threats 
created by providing any of the services discussed in 
paragraph 3.89. 




 

Application Guidance: Documentation 

3.108 Documentation of independence considerations provides evidence 
of the auditor’s judgments in forming conclusions regarding compliance 
with independence requirements. 

 

 


Professional 
Judgment 



Requirement: Professional Judgment 

3.109 Auditors must use professional judgment in planning and 
conducting the engagement and in reporting the results. 



 

Application Guidance: Professional Judgment 

3.110 Professional judgment includes exercising reasonable care and 
professional skepticism. Reasonable care includes acting diligently in 
accordance with applicable professional standards and ethical principles. 
Attributes of professional skepticism include a questioning mind, 
awareness of conditions that may indicate possible misstatement owing 
to error or fraud, and a critical assessment of evidence. Professional 
skepticism includes being alert to, for example, evidence that contradicts 
other evidence obtained or information that brings into question the 
reliability of documents or responses to inquiries to be used as evidence. 
Further, it includes a mindset in which auditors assume that management 
is neither dishonest nor of unquestioned honesty. Auditors may accept 
records and documents as genuine unless they have reason to believe 
the contrary. Auditors may consider documenting procedures undertaken 
to support their application of professional skepticism in highly judgmental 
or subjective areas under audit. 

3.111 Using the auditor’s professional knowledge, skills, and abilities, in 
good faith and with integrity, to diligently gather information and 


objectively evaluate the sufficiency and appropriateness of evidence is a 
critical component of GAGAS engagements. Professional judgment and 
competence are interrelated because judgments made depend upon the 
auditor’s competence, as discussed in chapter 4. 

3.112 Professional judgment represents the application of the collective 
knowledge, skills, and abilities of all the personnel involved with an 
engagement, as well as the professional judgment of individual auditors. 
In addition, professional judgment may involve consultation with other 
stakeholders, specialists, and management in the audit organization. 

3.113 Using professional judgment is important to auditors in carrying out 
all aspects of their professional responsibilities, including following the 
independence standards and related conceptual framework; maintaining 
objectivity and credibility; assigning competent personnel to the 
engagement; defining the scope of work; evaluating, documenting, and 
reporting the results of the work; and maintaining appropriate quality 
control over the engagement process. 

3.114 Using professional judgment is important to auditors in applying the 
conceptual framework to determine independence in a given situation. 
This includes identifying and evaluating any threats to independence, 
including threats to the appearance of independence, and related 
safeguards that may mitigate the identified threats.26 

26See para. 3.21b for a description of independence in appearance. 

27See paras. 4.02 through 4.15 for a discussion of competence. 

3.115 Using professional judgment is important to auditors in determining 
the necessary level of understanding of the engagement subject matter 
and related circumstances. This includes considering whether the audit 
team’s collective experience, training, knowledge, skills, abilities, and 
overall understanding are sufficient to assess the risks that the subject 
matter of the engagement may contain a significant inaccuracy or could 
be misinterpreted.27 

3.116 An auditor’s consideration of the risk level of each engagement, 
including the risk of arriving at improper conclusions, is also important. 
Within the context of audit risk, exercising professional judgment in 
determining the sufficiency and appropriateness of evidence to be used to 
support the findings and conclusions based on the engagement 


objectives and any recommendations reported is integral to the 
engagement process. 

3.117 While this requirement places responsibility on each auditor and 
audit organization to exercise professional judgment in planning and 
conducting an engagement, it does not imply unlimited responsibility nor 
does it imply infallibility on the part of either the individual auditor or the 
audit organization. Absolute assurance is not attainable because of 
factors such as the nature of evidence and characteristics of fraud. 
Professional judgment does not mean eliminating all possible limitations 
or weaknesses associated with a specific engagement, but rather 
identifying, assessing, mitigating, and concluding on them. 


Figure 1: Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards Conceptual Framework for Independence 

 


 

 


Figure 2: Independence Considerations for Preparing Accounting Records and 
Financial Statements 

 


 


Chapter 4: Competence and Continuing 
Professional Education 



4.01 This chapter establishes the generally accepted government auditing 
standards (GAGAS) requirements for competence and continuing 
professional education (CPE). Competence includes being 
knowledgeable about the specific GAGAS requirements and having the 
skills and abilities to proficiently apply that knowledge on GAGAS 
engagements. CPE contributes to auditors’ competence. The 
requirements of this chapter are intended to be followed in conjunction 
with all other applicable GAGAS requirements. 

 


Competence 



Requirements: General 

4.02 The audit organization’s management must assign auditors to 
conduct the engagement who before beginning work on the 
engagement collectively possess the competence needed to address 
the engagement objectives and perform their work in accordance with 
GAGAS. 

4.03 The audit organization’s management must assign auditors who 
before beginning work on the engagement possess the competence 
needed for their assigned roles. 

4.04 The audit organization should have a process for recruitment, 
hiring, continuous development, assignment, and evaluation of 
personnel so that the workforce has the essential knowledge, skills, 
and abilities necessary to conduct the engagement. The nature, 
extent, and formality of the process will depend on various factors, 
such as the size of the audit organization, its structure, and its work. 



 

Application Guidance: General 

4.05 Competence is the knowledge, skills, and abilities, obtained from 
education and experience, necessary to conduct the GAGAS 
engagement. Competence enables auditors to make sound professional 
judgments. Competence includes possessing the technical knowledge 
and skills necessary for the assigned role and the type of work being 
done. This includes possessing specific knowledge about GAGAS. 

4.06 Competence is derived from a combination of education and 
experience. Education is a structured and systematic process aimed at 
developing knowledge, skills, and other abilities; it is a process that is 
typically but not exclusively conducted in academic or learning 


environments. Experience refers to workplace activities that are relevant 
to developing professional proficiency. Competence is not necessarily 
measured by years of auditing experience because such a quantitative 
measurement may not accurately reflect the kinds of experiences gained 
by auditors in any given time period. Maintaining competence through a 
commitment to learning and development throughout auditors’ 
professional lives is an important element for auditors. 

Application Guidance: Indicators of Competence 

Technical Knowledge and Skills 

4.07 The knowledge, skills, and abilities needed when conducting an 
engagement in accordance with GAGAS include the understanding 
necessary to proficiently apply 

a. GAGAS; 
b. standards, statutory requirements, regulations, criteria, and 
guidance applicable to auditing or the objectives for the 
engagement(s) being conducted; and 
c. techniques, tools, and guidance related to professional expertise 
applicable to the work being performed. 


Auditor proficiency in these areas helps ensure that engagements are 
conducted in accordance with GAGAS. 

4.08 Achieving the knowledge, skills, and abilities needed to conduct a 
GAGAS engagement may include 

a. having prior experience in the subject matter or type of 
engagement; 
b. completing CPE related to the subject matter or type of 
engagement; and 
c. obtaining degrees or certifications relevant to the subject matter or 
type of engagement. 


 

 


Competence for Assigned Roles 

4.09 The audit organization and engagement teams may consider the 
levels of proficiency needed for each role on the engagement when 
assigning auditors to the engagement. 

4.10 Roles on the engagement generally include the following: 

a. Nonsupervisory auditors: Auditors in these roles plan or perform 
engagement procedures. Work situations for these auditors are 
characterized by low levels of ambiguity, complexity, and 
uncertainty. The nonsupervisory auditor role necessitates at least 
a basic level of proficiency. 
b. Supervisory auditors: Auditors in these roles plan engagements, 
perform engagement procedures, or direct engagements. Work 
situations for these auditors are characterized by moderate levels 
of ambiguity, complexity, and uncertainty. The supervisory auditor 
role necessitates at least an intermediate level of proficiency. 
c. Partners and directors: Auditors in these roles plan engagements, 
perform engagement procedures, or direct or report on 
engagements. Partners and directors may also be responsible for 
reviewing engagement quality prior to issuing the report, for 
signing the report, or both. Work situations for these auditors are 
characterized by high levels of ambiguity, complexity, and 
uncertainty. The partner and director role necessitates an 
advanced level of proficiency. 


4.11 Definitions of key terms follow: 

a. Planning: Determining engagement objectives, scope, and 
methodology; establishing criteria to evaluate matters subject to 
audit; or coordinating the work of the other audit organizations. 
This definition excludes auditors whose role is limited to gathering 
information used in planning the engagement. 
b. Directing: Supervising the efforts of others who are involved in 
accomplishing the objectives of the engagement or reviewing 
engagement work to determine whether those objectives have 
been accomplished. 



c. Performing engagement procedures: Performing tests and 
procedures necessary to accomplish the engagement objectives 
in accordance with GAGAS. 
d. Reporting: Determining the report content and substance or 
reviewing reports to determine whether the engagement 
objectives have been accomplished and the evidence supports 
the report’s technical content and substance prior to issuance. 
This includes signing the report. 


Requirement: Specialists 

4.12 The engagement team should determine that specialists assisting 
the engagement team on a GAGAS engagement are qualified and 
competent in their areas of specialization. 



 

Application Guidance: Specialists 

4.13 Some engagements may necessitate the use of specialized 
techniques or methods that call for the skills of specialists. Specialists do 
not include individuals with special skill or knowledge related to 
specialized areas within the field of accounting or auditing, such as 
income taxation and information technology. Such individuals are 
considered auditors. 

4.14 The competence and qualifications of specialists significantly affect 
whether their work will be adequate for the engagement team’s purposes 
and will meet GAGAS requirements. Competence of specialists relates to 
the nature and level of expertise. Qualifications of specialists relate to 
their professional certifications, reputations, and previous work in the 
subject matter. Other relevant factors include the ability of specialists to 
exercise competence in the circumstances of the engagement and the 
effects that bias, conflict of interest, or the influence of others may have 
on the specialists’ professional judgment. 

4.15 Sources that may inform the auditors’ assessment of the 
competence and professional qualifications of a specialist include the 
following: 

a. the professional certification, license, or other recognition of the 
competence of the specialist in his or her field, as appropriate; 



b. the reputation and standing of the specialist in the views of peers 
and others familiar with the specialist’s capability or performance; 
c. the specialist’s experience and previous work in the subject 
matter; 
d. the auditors’ assessment of the specialist’s knowledge and 
qualification based on prior experience in using the specialist’s 
work; 
e. the specialist’s knowledge of any technical performance standards 
or other professional or industry requirements in the specialist’s 
field (for example, ethical standards and other membership 
requirements of a professional body or industry association, 
accreditation standards of a licensing body, or requirements 
imposed by law or regulation); 
f. the knowledge of the specialist with respect to relevant auditing 
standards; and 
g. the assessment of unexpected events, changes in conditions, or 
the evidence obtained from the results of engagement procedures 
that indicate it may be necessary to reconsider the initial 
evaluation of the competence and qualifications of a specialist as 
the engagement progresses. 


 

 


Continuing 
Professional 
Education 



Requirements: General 

4.16 Auditors who plan, direct, perform engagement procedures for, or 
report on an engagement conducted in accordance with GAGAS 
should develop and maintain their professional competence by 
completing at least 80 hours of CPE in every 2-year period as follows. 


CPE hours 

Subject matter categories of CPE 

24 hours 

Subject matter directly related to the government environment, 
government auditing, or the specific or unique environment in 
which the audited entity operates 

56 hours 

Subject matter that directly enhance auditors’ professional 
expertise to conduct engagements 



 




4.17 Auditors should complete at least 20 hours of CPE in each year of 
the 2-year periods. 

4.18 The audit organization should maintain documentation of each 
auditor’s CPE.28 



28See paras. 4.51 and 5.16 for a discussion of CPE documentation. 

 

Application Guidance: General 

4.19 The continuing competence of the audit organization’s personnel 
depends, in part, on an appropriate level of CPE so that auditors maintain 
the knowledge, skills, and abilities necessary to conduct the GAGAS 
engagement. Obtaining CPE specifically on GAGAS, particularly during 
years in which there are revisions to the standards, may assist auditors in 
maintaining the competence necessary to conduct GAGAS engagements. 

4.20 CPE used to fulfill the 24-hour requirement may be taken at any time 
during the 2-year measurement period. 

Application Guidance: Subject Matter Categories of CPE 

4.21 Determining what subjects are appropriate for individual auditors to 
satisfy the CPE requirements is a matter of professional judgment to be 
exercised by auditors in consultation with appropriate officials in their 
audit organization. When determining what specific subjects qualify for 
the CPE requirement, the auditors may consider the types of knowledge, 
skills, and abilities, and the level of proficiency necessary, in order to be 
competent for their assigned roles. Auditors may consider probable future 
engagements to which they may be assigned when selecting specific 
CPE subjects to satisfy the 24-hour and the 56-hour CPE requirements. 
The audit organization is ultimately responsible for determining whether a 
subject or topic qualifies as acceptable for its auditors. 

4.22 The subject matter categories for the 24-hour requirement may be 
used to satisfy the 56-hour CPE requirement. If CPE in any of the subject 
matter and topics that would satisfy the 56-hour requirement, as 
discussed in paragraph 4.24, is tailored specifically to the government 
environment, such CPE may qualify toward satisfying the 24-hour 


requirement. Examples of CPE subjects that may qualify for each of the 
categories are listed below. 

Subject Matter Directly Related to the Government Environment, 
Government Auditing, or the Specific or Unique Environment in Which the 
Audited Entity Operates (24-Hour Requirement) 

4.23 Subject matter directly related to the government environment, 
government auditing, or the specific or unique environment in which the 
audited entity operates may include, but is not limited to, the following: 

a. generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS) and 
related topics, such as internal control as addressed in GAGAS; 
b. the applicable American Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ 
(AICPA) Statements on Auditing Standards;29 
c. the applicable AICPA Statements on Standards for Attestation 
Engagements and Statements on Standards for Accounting and 
Review Services;30 
d. the applicable auditing standards issued by the Institute of Internal 
Auditors, the Public Company Accounting and Oversight Board, 
the International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board, or 
other auditing standard-setting body; 
e. U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or the applicable 
financial reporting framework being used, such as those issued by 
the Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board, the 
Governmental Accounting Standards Board, or the Financial 
Accounting Standards Board; 
f. Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government;31 


29See para. 6.01 for a discussion of the AICPA standards incorporated into GAGAS for 
financial audits. 

30See para. 7.01 for a discussion of the AICPA standards incorporated into GAGAS for 
attestation engagements and reviews of financial statements. 

31GAO, Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government, GAO-14-704G 
(Washington, D.C.: September 2014). 


g. Internal Control—Integrated Framework,32 as applicable; 
h. requirements for recipients of federal contracts or grants, such as 
Single Audits under the Uniform Administrative Requirements, 
Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards;33 
i. requirements for federal, state, or local program audits; 
j. relevant or applicable audit standards or guides, including those 
for information technology auditing and forensic auditing; 
k. information technology auditing topics applicable to the 
government environment; 
l. fraud topics applicable to a government environment; 
m. statutory requirements, regulations, criteria, guidance, trends, 
risks, or topics relevant to the specific and unique environment in 
which the audited entity operates; 
n. statutory requirements, regulations, criteria, guidance, trends, 
risks, or topics relevant to the subject matter of the engagement, 
such as scientific, medical, environmental, educational, or any 
other specialized subject matter; 
o. topics directly related to the government environment, such as the 
nature of government (structures, financing, and operations), 
economic or other conditions and pressures facing governments, 
common government financial management issues, 
appropriations, measurement or evaluation of government 
financial or program performance, and application of general audit 
methodologies or techniques to a government environment or 
program; 


32Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission, Internal 
Control—Integrated Framework (New York: American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants, 2013). 

33See Part 200, Subpart F, of Title 2, Code of Federal Regulations. 


p. specialized audit methodologies or analytical techniques, such as 
the use of complex survey instruments, actuarial estimates, 
statistical analysis tests, or statistical or nonstatistical sampling; 
q. performance auditing topics, such as obtaining evidence, 
professional skepticism, and other applicable audit skills;34 
r. government ethics and independence; 
s. partnerships between governments, businesses, and citizens; 
t. legislative policies and procedures; 
u. topics related to fraud, waste, abuse, or improper payments 
affecting government entities; and 
v. compliance with laws and regulations. 


34See chs. 8 and 9 for performance audit topics that may be included. 

Subject Matter That Directly Enhances Auditors’ Professional Expertise to 
Conduct Engagements (56-Hour Requirement) 

4.24 Subject matter that directly enhances auditors’ professional 
expertise to conduct engagements may include, but is not limited to, the 
following: 

a. subject matter categories for the 24-hour requirement listed in 
paragraph 4.23; 
b. general ethics and independence; 
c. topics related to accounting, acquisitions management, asset 
management, budgeting, cash management, contracting, data 
analysis, program performance, or procurement; 
d. communicating clearly and effectively, both orally and in writing; 
e. managing time and resources; 
f. leadership; 



g. software applications used in conducting engagements; 
h. information technology; and 
i. economics, human capital management, social and political 
sciences, and other academic disciplines that may be applied in 
engagements, as applicable. 


Application Guidance: Exemptions and Exceptions 

4.25 Auditors may be exempted from the 56-hour CPE requirement by 
the audit organization, but not the 24-hour requirement, if they 

a. charge less than 20 percent of their time annually to engagements 
conducted in accordance with GAGAS and 
b. are only involved in performing engagement procedures, but not 
involved in planning, directing, or reporting on the engagement. 


The 20 percent may be based on historical or estimated charges in a 
year, provided that the audit organization has a basis for this 
determination and monitors actual time. For auditors who change status 
such that they are charging more than 20 percent of their time annually to 
engagements under GAGAS, the audit organization may prorate the 
required CPE hours similar to when auditors are assigned to GAGAS 
engagements after the beginning of a 2-year CPE measurement period, 
as discussed in paragraph 4.42. 

4.26 Nonsupervisory auditors who charge less than 40 hours of their time 
annually to engagements conducted in accordance with GAGAS may be 
exempted by the organization from all CPE requirements in paragraph 
4.16. 

4.27 The audit organization may exempt from the CPE requirements 
college and university students employed on a temporary basis for a 
limited period of time (for example, an internship of limited duration) or 
enrolled in a formal program sponsored by the college or university for a 
specific period of employment, such as a term or semester. 

4.28 Employees or contract employees performing support services 
within the audit organization, such as individuals who are assigned to 
positions in budgeting, human resources, training, and administrative 
functions, and who do not conduct engagement activities are not auditors 


subject to the GAGAS CPE requirements. Employees or contract 
employees who assist in the engagement by performing support services, 
such as performing background research, data entry, writing and editing 
assistance, proofreading, or report production and distribution are not 
auditors subject to the GAGAS CPE requirements. 

4.29 The audit organization, at its discretion, may grant exemptions from 
a portion of the CPE requirement in the event of extended absences or 
other extenuating circumstances if situations such as the following 
prevent auditors from fulfilling those requirements and conducting 
engagements: 

a. ill health, 
b. maternity or paternity leave, 
c. extended family leave, 
d. sabbaticals, 
e. leave without pay absences, 
f. foreign residency, 
g. military service, and 
h. disasters. 


The audit organization may not grant exceptions for reasons such as 
workload, budget, or travel constraints. 

Application Guidance: Specialists 

4.30 External specialists are not auditors subject to the GAGAS CPE 
requirements. Also, internal specialists assisting on a GAGAS 
engagement who are not involved in planning, directing, performing 
engagement procedures, or reporting on a GAGAS engagement are not 
auditors subject to the GAGAS CPE requirements. 

4.31 Internal specialists who are performing work in accordance with 
GAGAS as part of the engagement team—including planning, directing, 
performing engagement procedures, or reporting on a GAGAS 
engagement—are considered auditors and are subject to the GAGAS 


CPE requirements. The GAGAS CPE requirements become effective for 
internal specialists when an audit organization first assigns an internal 
specialist to an engagement. Because internal specialists apply 
specialized knowledge in government engagements, CPE in their areas 
of specialization qualifies under the requirement for 24 hours of CPE that 
directly relates to government auditing, the government environment, or 
the specific or unique environment in which the audited entity operates. 

Application Guidance: Programs and Activities That Qualify for CPE 

4.32 CPE programs are structured educational activities or programs with 
learning objectives designed to maintain or enhance the auditors’ 
competence to address engagement objectives and perform work in 
accordance with GAGAS. 

4.33 The following are examples of structured educational programs and 
activities: 

a. internal training programs (e.g., courses, seminars, and 
workshops); 
b. education and development programs presented at conferences, 
conventions, meetings, and seminars and meetings or workshops 
of professional organizations; 
c. training programs presented by other audit organizations, 
educational organizations, foundations, and associations; 
d. web-based seminars and individual-study or eLearning programs; 
e. audio conferences; 
f. accredited university and college courses (credit and noncredit); 
g. standard-setting organization, professional organization, or audit 
organization staff meetings when a structured educational 
program with learning objectives is presented (e.g., the portion of 
the meeting that is a structured educational program with learning 
objectives designed to maintain or enhance auditors’ 
competence); 
h. correspondence courses, individual-study guides, and workbooks; 



i. serving as a speaker, panelist, instructor, or discussion leader at 
programs that qualify for CPE hours; 
j. developing or technical review of courses or the course materials 
for programs that qualify for CPE hours; and 
k. publishing articles and books that contribute directly to the 
author’s professional proficiency to conduct engagements. 


4.34 Individual auditors who are members of professional organizations 
or who are licensed professionals, such as certified public accountants, 
are cautioned that the GAGAS CPE requirements, while similar in many 
respects to those of professional organizations and of licensing bodies, 
may not be identical. Some subjects and topics may be acceptable to 
state licensing bodies or professional organizations, but may not qualify 
as CPE under GAGAS. Conversely, some CPE that qualifies for GAGAS 
may not qualify for state licensing bodies or professional organizations. 
Careful consideration of auditors’ relevant professional organizations or 
licensing body requirements is encouraged to meet other relevant CPE 
requirements. 

4.35 Examples of training topics that may qualify as CPE for state 
licensing bodies or professional organizations but would not generally 
qualify as CPE for purposes of satisfying requirements under GAGAS 
include certain training in taxation, personal financial planning and 
investment, taxation strategies, estate planning, retirement planning, and 
practice management, unless such training directly enhances the 
auditors’ professional proficiency to perform engagements or relate to the 
subject matter of an engagement. However, if certain taxation or other 
topics relate to an objective or the subject matter of an engagement, 
training in those related topics could qualify as CPE under GAGAS. 

4.36 Examples of programs and activities that do not qualify for CPE 
hours under GAGAS include, but are not limited to, the following: 

a. on-the-job training; 
b. basic or elementary courses in subjects or topics in which auditors 
already have the knowledge and skills being taught; 
c. programs that are designed for general personal development, 
such as résumé writing, improving parent-child relations, personal 
investments and money management, and retirement planning; 



d. programs that demonstrate office equipment or software that is 
not used in conducting engagements; 
e. programs that provide training on the audit organization’s 
administrative operations; 
f. business sessions at professional organization conferences, 
conventions, and meetings that do not have a structured 
educational program with learning objectives; 
g. conducting external quality control reviews; and 
h. sitting for professional certification examinations. 


Basic or elementary courses would be acceptable in cases where they 
are deemed necessary as “refresher” courses to enhance the auditors’ 
proficiency to conduct audits and attestation engagements. 

Application Guidance: Measurement of CPE 

4.37 A CPE hour may be granted for each 50 minutes of participation in 
programs and activities that qualify. 

4.38 For university or college credit courses, each unit of college credit 
under a semester system equals 15 CPE hours, and each unit of college 
credit under a quarter system equals 10 CPE hours. For university or 
college noncredit courses, CPE hours may be granted only for the actual 
classroom time. 

4.39 For individual-study programs where successful completion is 
measured by a summary examination, CPE credit may be granted if 
auditors complete the examination with a passing grade. Auditors in other 
individual-study programs may earn CPE hours when they satisfactorily 
complete the requirements of the self-study program. The number of 
hours granted may be based on the CPE provider’s recommended 
number of CPE hours for the program. 

4.40 Speakers, instructors, and discussion leaders at programs that 
qualify for CPE and auditors who develop or write the course materials 
may receive CPE hours for preparation and presentation time to the 
extent the subject matter contributes to auditors’ competence. One CPE 
hour may be granted for each 50 minutes of presentation time. Up to 2 
CPE hours may be granted for developing, writing, or advance 


preparation for each 50 minutes of the presentation. Auditors may not 
receive CPE hours for either preparation or presentation time for repeated 
presentations that they make within the 2-year period, unless the subject 
matter involved was changed significantly for each presentation. The 
maximum number of CPE hours that may be granted to an auditor as a 
speaker, instructor, discussion leader, or preparer of course materials 
may not exceed 40 hours for any 2-year period. 

4.41 Articles, books, or materials written by auditors and published on 
subjects and topics that contribute directly to professional proficiency to 
conduct engagements qualify for CPE hours in the year they are 
published. One CPE hour may be granted for each hour devoted to 
writing articles, books, or materials that are published. However, CPE 
hours for published writings may not exceed 20 hours for any 2-year 
period. 

4.42 Auditors hired or assigned to a GAGAS engagement after the 
beginning of an audit organization’s 2-year CPE period may complete a 
prorated number of CPE hours. An audit organization may define a 
prorated number of hours based on the number of full 6-month intervals 
remaining in the CPE period. For example, an audit organization has a 2-
year CPE period running from January 1, 2020, through December 31, 
2021. The audit organization assigns a new auditor to a GAGAS 
engagement in May 2020. The audit organization may calculate the 
prorated CPE requirement for the auditor as follows: 

a. Number of full 6-month intervals remaining in the CPE period: 3 
b. Number of 6-month intervals in the full 2-year period: 4 
c. Newly assigned auditor’s CPE requirement: 3/4 x 80 hours = 60 
hours 


When auditors are newly hired or newly assigned to GAGAS 
engagements and have had some previous CPE, the audit organization 
has flexibility and may choose between using a pro rata approach or 
evaluating whether and to what extent any CPE already taken in that 
period would satisfy GAGAS CPE requirements. 

4.43 For newly assigned auditors who are subject to the 24-hour 
requirement, the number of prorated hours may be calculated in a similar 
manner: 3/4 x 24 hours = 18 hours, in this example. The prorated amount 
of hours would be the total requirement over the partial period. The 20-


hour minimum for each CPE year would not apply when the prorated 
number of hours is being used to cover a partial 2-year CPE period. 

4.44 At their discretion, audit organizations may give auditors who have 
not completed the 80-hour CPE requirement for any 2-year period up to 2 
months immediately following the 2-year period to make up the 
deficiency. Audit organizations may also give auditors who have not 
completed the 20 hours of CPE in a 1-year period up to 2 months 
immediately following the 1-year period to make up the deficiency. Any 
CPE hours completed toward a deficiency in one period may be 
documented in the CPE records and may not be counted toward the 
requirements for the next period. Audit organizations that grant the 2-
month grace period may not allow auditors who have not satisfied the 
CPE requirements after the grace period to participate in GAGAS 
engagements until those requirements are satisfied. 

4.45 Auditors may not carry over CPE hours earned in excess of the 80-
hour and 24-hour requirements from one 2-year CPE measurement 
period to the next. 

4.46 If an audit organization discontinues conducting GAGAS 
engagements or reassigns auditors to non-GAGAS assignments before 
auditors complete the CPE requirements, the auditors are not required to 
complete the number of hours to satisfy the CPE requirements. However, 
the audit organization may wish to have its auditors complete those 
requirements if it is foreseeable that the auditors will conduct GAGAS 
engagements in the future. 

4.47 Auditors who complete a professional certification review course 
may receive CPE hours only for those segments of the review course that 
are relevant to the standards, statutory requirements, regulations, criteria, 
and guidance applicable to auditing or to the engagement objectives 
being performed, or for subject matter that directly enhances auditors’ 
professional expertise to conduct engagements. 

4.48 To simplify administration of the CPE requirements, an audit 
organization may establish a standard 2-year period for all of its auditors, 
which can be on either a fixed-year or rolling-year basis. A fixed-year 
measurement period, for example, would be the 2-year periods 2019 
through 2020, 2021 through 2022, and so forth, while a rolling-year 
measurement period would be 2019 through 2020, 2020 through 2021, 
2021 through 2022, and so forth. 


4.49 An audit organization may use a measurement date other than the 
date it started its first GAGAS engagement, or the audit organization may 
choose to change its measurement date to coincide with a fiscal year or 
another reporting requirement, such as one established by a state 
licensing body or professional organization. For example, if an audit 
organization changes the end date of the measurement period from 
December 31 to June 30, during the audit organization’s transition period 
(January 1 to June 30), its auditors may complete at least a prorated 
number of CPE hours for the 6-month transition period. The number of 
prorated hours required may be calculated using the method illustrated in 
paragraphs 4.42 and 4.43. 

Application Guidance: Monitoring CPE 

4.50 The audit organization’s policies and procedures for CPE may 
address the following: 

a. identifying all auditors required to meet the CPE requirements; 
b. providing auditors with the opportunity to attend internal CPE 
programs, external CPE programs, or both; 
c. assisting auditors in determining which programs, activities, and 
subjects qualify for CPE; 
d. documenting the number of CPE hours completed by each 
auditor; and 
e. monitoring auditor compliance with the CPE requirements to 
ensure that auditors complete sufficient CPE in qualifying 
programs and subjects. 


4.51 Policies and procedures for documentation may address maintaining 
documentation of the CPE hours completed by each auditor subject to the 
CPE requirements for an appropriate period of time to satisfy any legal 
and administrative requirements, including peer review. The audit 
organization may maintain documentation of CPE or may delegate the 
responsibility to the auditor and put in place adequate procedures to 
ensure that its records of CPE hours earned by auditors are supported by 
the documentation maintained by auditors. Documentation may include 
the following information: 

a. the name of the organization providing the CPE; 



b. the title of the training program, including the subject matter or 
field of study; 
c. the dates attended for group programs or dates completed for 
individual study programs; 
d. the number of CPE hours earned toward the 56-hour and 24-hour 
requirements; 
e. any reasons for specific exceptions granted to the CPE 
requirement; and 
f. evidence of completion of CPE, such as a certificate or other 
evidence of completion from the CPE provider for group and 
individual-study programs, if provided; documentation of CPE 
courses presented or copies of course materials developed by or 
for speakers, instructors, or discussion leaders, along with a 
written statement supporting the number of CPE hours claimed; or 
a copy of the published book, article, or other material that name 
the writer as author or contributor, or a written statement from the 
writer supporting the number of CPE hours claimed. 


4.52 The audit organization may monitor CPE compliance through its 
internal inspections or other quality assurance monitoring activities. 

4.53 The audit organization is not required to prepare reports on CPE. 
However, the audit organization may consider preparing a periodic CPE 
report for distribution to the auditors or maintaining or accessing training 
data online to monitor its auditors’ progress toward meeting the CPE 
requirements. 


Chapter 5: Quality Control and Peer Review 



5.01 This chapter establishes the generally accepted government auditing 
standards (GAGAS) requirements and guidance for quality control and 
assurance, and for administering, planning, performing, and reporting on 
peer reviews of audit organizations that conduct engagements in 
accordance with GAGAS. The requirements of this chapter are intended 
to be followed in conjunction with those of all other applicable GAGAS 
requirements. 

 

Quality Control and 
Assurance 




Requirement: Quality Control and Assurance 

5.02 An audit organization conducting engagements in accordance 
with GAGAS must establish and maintain a system of quality control 
that is designed to provide the audit organization with reasonable 
assurance that the organization and its personnel comply with 
professional standards and applicable legal and regulatory 
requirements. 



 

Application Guidance: Quality Control and Assurance 

5.03 An audit organization’s system of quality control encompasses the 
organization’s leadership, emphasis on performing high-quality work, and 
policies and procedures designed to provide reasonable assurance of 
complying with professional standards and applicable legal and regulatory 
requirements. The nature, extent, and formality of an audit organization’s 
quality control system will vary based on the audit organization’s 
circumstances, such as size, number of offices and geographic 
dispersion, knowledge and experience of its personnel, nature and 
complexity of its engagement work, and cost-benefit considerations. 

 

System of Quality Control 




Requirement: System of Quality Control 

5.04 An audit organization should document its quality control policies 
and procedures and communicate those policies and procedures to its 
personnel. The audit organization should document compliance with its 
quality control policies and procedures and maintain such 
documentation for a period of time sufficient to enable those 
performing monitoring procedures and peer reviews to evaluate the 

 




extent to which the audit organization complies with its quality control 
policies and procedures. 



 

 

 

Leadership 
Responsibilities for Quality 
within the Audit 
Organization 




Requirements: Leadership Responsibilities for Quality within the 
Audit Organization 

5.05 The audit organization should establish policies and procedures 
on leadership responsibilities for quality within the audit organization 
that include designating responsibility for quality of engagements 
conducted in accordance with GAGAS and communicating policies 
and procedures relating to quality. 

5.06 The audit organization should establish policies and procedures 
designed to provide reasonable assurance that those assigned 
operational responsibility for the audit organization’s system of quality 
control have sufficient and appropriate experience and ability, and the 
necessary authority, to assume that responsibility. 



 

 


Application Guidance: Leadership Responsibilities for Quality within 
the Audit Organization 

5.07 Appropriate policies and communications encourage a culture that 
recognizes that quality is essential in conducting GAGAS engagements 
and that audit organization leadership is ultimately responsible for the 
system of quality control. 

 

Independence, Legal, and 
Ethical Requirements 




Requirements: Independence, Legal, and Ethical Requirements 

5.08 The audit organization should establish policies and procedures 
on independence and legal and ethical requirements that are designed 
to provide reasonable assurance that the organization and its 

 




Chapter 5:Quality Control andPeer Review

personnel maintain independence and comply with applicable legaland ethical requirements.35

5.09At least annually, the audit organization should obtain written 
affirmation of compliance with its policies and procedures onindependence from all of its personnel required to be independent. 
Application Guidance:Independence, Legal, and Ethical 
Requirements

5.10Policies and procedures pertaining to independence and legal andethical requirements assist the audit organization in
a.communicating its independence requirements to its personneland
b.identifying and evaluating circumstances and relationships that 
create threats to independence and taking appropriate action to 
eliminate those threatsor reduce them to an acceptable level byapplying safeguards or, if considered appropriate, withdrawing 
from the engagement where withdrawal is not prohibited by law orregulation.
5.11Written affirmation of compliance with its policies and procedures on 
independence from all audit organization personnel required to be 
independent may be in paper or electronic form. By obtaining affirmation 
of retrospective compliance with the audit organization’s policiesand 
procedureson independence during a specified period and taking 
appropriate action on information indicating noncompliance, or potentialnoncompliance, the organization demonstrates the importance that it 
attaches to independence and keeps the issue current for, and visible to,
its personnel. An audit organization may obtain affirmation of required 
personnel’scompliance with policies and procedures on independence 
more frequently than once per year. For example, affirmation may be 
obtained on a per-engagement basis when such engagements last lessthan 1 year.
35See paras. 3.02 through 3.16 for a discussion of ethicalprinciplesand paras. 3.18 
through 3.108 for independence requirements and guidance.

Page 83GAO-21-368GGovernment Auditing Standards


Initiation, Acceptance, and 
Continuance of 
Engagements 



Requirement: Initiation, Acceptance, and Continuance of 
Engagements 

5.12 The audit organization should establish policies and procedures 
for the initiation, acceptance, and continuance of engagements that are 
designed to provide reasonable assurance that the organization will 
undertake engagements only if it 

a. complies with professional standards, applicable legal and 
regulatory requirements, and ethical principles; 
b. acts within its legal mandate or authority; and 
c. has the capabilities, including time and resources, to do so. 




 

Application Guidance: Initiation, Acceptance, and Continuance of 
Engagements 

5.13 Government audit organizations initiate engagements as a result of 
(1) legal mandates, (2) requests from legislative bodies or oversight 
bodies, and (3) audit organization discretion. In the case of legal 
mandates and requests, a government audit organization may be 
required to conduct the engagement and may not be permitted to make 
decisions about acceptance or continuance and may not be permitted to 
resign or withdraw from the engagement. 

5.14 Audit organizations may operate with limited resources. Audit 
organizations may consider their workloads in determining whether they 
have the resources to deliver the range of work to the desired level of 
quality. To achieve this, audit organizations may develop systems to 
prioritize their work in a way that takes into account the need to maintain 
quality. 

 

Human Resources 




Requirements: Human Resources 

5.15 The audit organization should establish policies and procedures 
for human resources that are designed to provide the organization with 
reasonable assurance that it has personnel with the competence to 
conduct GAGAS engagements in accordance with professional 




Chapter 5:Quality Control andPeer Review

standards and applicable legal and regulatory requirements.36

5.16The audit organization should establish policies and proceduresto provide reasonable assurance that auditors who are performing 
work in accordance with GAGASmeet the continuing professionaleducation (CPE) requirements, including maintaining documentation of 
the CPE completed and any exemptions granted.
Application Guidance: Human Resources

5.17Effective recruitment processesand procedures help the audit 
organization select individuals of integrity who have the capacity to 
develop the competence and capabilities necessary to perform the audit 
organization’s work and possess the appropriate characteristics to enable 
them to perform competently. Examples of such characteristics include 
meeting minimum academic requirements established by the audit 
organization and leadership traits.
5.18The audit organization may use a suitably qualified external person 
to conduct engagement work when internal resources, for example, 
personnel with particular areas of technical expertise, are unavailable.
5.19Effectiveperformance evaluation, compensation, and advancementproceduresgive due recognition and reward to developing and 
maintaining competent personnel. Steps that an audit organization maytake in developing and maintaining competent personnel include the 
following:
a.making personnel aware of the audit organization’s expectationsregarding performance and ethicalprinciples;
b.providing personnel with an evaluation of, and counseling on, 
performance, progress, and careerdevelopment; and
c.helping personnel understand that compensation and 
advancement to positions of greater responsibility depend on, 
among other things, performance quality, and that failure to 
36Refer to paras. 4.02 through 4.15 for requirements and guidance on competence.

Page 85GAO-21-368GGovernment Auditing Standards


comply with the audit organization’s policies and procedures may 
result in disciplinary action. 


5.20 The size and circumstances of the audit organization are important 
considerations in determining the structure of the audit organization’s 
performance evaluation process. A smaller audit organization, in 
particular, may employ less formal methods of evaluating the 
performance of its personnel. 

5.21 Objectives of the audit organization’s human resources policies and 
procedures may include 

a. promoting learning and training for all personnel to encourage 
their professional development and to help ensure that personnel 
are trained in current developments in the profession and 
b. helping ensure that personnel and any parties contracted to carry 
out work for the audit organization have an appropriate 
understanding of the environment(s) in which the organization 
operates and a good understanding of the work they are required 
to carry out. 


 

Engagement Performance 




Requirements: General 

5.22 The audit organization should establish policies and procedures 
for engagement performance, documentation, and reporting that are 
designed to provide the audit organization with reasonable assurance 
that engagements are conducted and reports are issued in accordance 
with professional standards and applicable legal and regulatory 
requirements. 

5.23 If auditors change the engagement objectives during the 
engagement, they should document the revised engagement 
objectives and the reasons for the changes. 

5.24 The audit organization should establish policies and procedures 
designed to provide it with reasonable assurance that 

a. appropriate consultation takes place on difficult or contentious 
issues that arise among engagement team members in the 





course of conducting a GAGAS engagement; 
b. both the individual seeking consultation and the individual 
consulted document and agree upon the nature and scope of 
such consultations; and 
c. the conclusions resulting from consultations are documented, 
understood by both the individual seeking consultation and the 
individual consulted, and implemented. 


5.25 If an engagement is terminated before it is completed and an 
audit report is not issued, auditors should document the results of the 
work to the date of termination and why the engagement was 
terminated. 



 

Application Guidance: General 

5.26 The audit organization’s policies and procedures may address 
consistency in the quality of engagement performance. This is often 
accomplished through written or electronic manuals, software tools or 
other forms of standardized documentation, and industry-specific or 
subject matter-specific guidance materials. Matters addressed may 
include the following: 

a. maintaining current policies and procedures; 
b. briefing the engagement team to provide an understanding of the 
engagement objectives and professional standards; 
c. complying with applicable engagement standards; 
d. planning the engagement, supervision, staff training, and 
mentoring; 
e. reviewing the work performed, the significant judgments made, 
and the type of report being issued; 
f. documenting the work performed and the timing and extent of 
review; 
g. reviewing the independence and qualifications of any specialists 
and the scope and quality of their work; 



h. resolving difficult or contentious issues or disagreements among 
team members, including specialists; 
i. obtaining and addressing comments from the audited entity on 
draft reports; and 
j. reporting findings and conclusions supported by the evidence 
obtained and in accordance with professional standards and 
applicable legal and regulatory requirements. 


5.27 The form and content of the documentation of the audit 
organization’s policies and procedures, as well as documentation of its 
compliance with those policies and procedures, are matters of 
professional judgment and will vary based on the organization’s 
circumstances. 

5.28 Documentation of policies and procedures, as well as compliance 
with those policies and procedures, may be either electronic or manual. 
For example, large audit organizations may use electronic databases to 
document matters such as independence confirmations, performance 
evaluations, and the results of monitoring. Smaller audit organizations 
may use more informal methods in the documentation of their systems of 
quality control, such as manual notes, checklists, and forms. 

5.29 Consultation includes discussion at the appropriate professional 
level with individuals within or outside the audit organization who have 
relevant specialized expertise. 

5.30 Consultation uses appropriate research resources, as well as the 
collective experience and technical expertise of the audit organization. 
Consultation helps promote quality and improves the application of 
professional judgment. Appropriate recognition of consultation in the audit 
organization’s policies and procedures helps promote a culture in which 
consultation is recognized as a strength and personnel are encouraged to 
consult on difficult or contentious issues. 

5.31 Effective consultation on significant technical, ethical, and other 
matters within the audit organization or, when applicable, outside the 
audit organization can be achieved when 

a. those consulted are given all the relevant facts that will enable 
them to provide informed advice; 



b. those consulted have appropriate knowledge, authority, and 
experience; and 
c. conclusions resulting from consultations are appropriately 
documented and implemented. 


5.32 Documentation of consultations with other professionals that involve 
difficult or contentious matters contributes to an understanding of 

a. the issue on which consultation was sought and 
b. the results of the consultation, including any decisions made, the 
basis for those decisions, and how they were implemented. 


5.33 An audit organization needing to obtain specialized or technical 
expertise from external providers may take advantage of services 
provided by 

a. other audit organizations, 
b. professional and regulatory bodies, and 
c. commercial organizations that provide relevant quality control 
services. 


5.34 Before contracting for services, consideration of the competence and 
capabilities of the external provider helps the audit organization determine 
whether the external provider is suitably qualified for that purpose. 

5.35 Determining whether and how to communicate the reason for 
terminating an engagement or changing the engagement objectives to 
those charged with governance, appropriate officials of the audited entity, 
the entity contracting for or requesting the engagement, and other 
appropriate officials will depend on the facts and circumstances and 
therefore is a matter of professional judgment. 

Requirements: Supervision 

5.36 The audit organization should establish policies and procedures 
that require engagement team members with appropriate levels of skill 
and proficiency in auditing to supervise engagements and review work 




performed by other engagement team members. 

5.37 The audit organization should assign responsibility for each 
engagement to an engagement partner or director with authority 
designated by the audit organization to assume that responsibility and 
should establish policies and procedures requiring the organization to 

a. communicate the identity and role of the engagement partner or 
director to management and those charged with governance of 
the audited entity and 
b. clearly define the responsibilities of the engagement partner or 
director and communicate them to that individual. 




 

Application Guidance: Supervision 

5.38 Appropriate teamwork and training help less experienced members 
of the engagement team to clearly understand the objectives of the 
assigned work. 

5.39 Engagement supervision includes the following: 

a. tracking the progress of the engagement; 
b. considering the competence of individual members of the 
engagement team, whether they understand their instructions, and 
whether the work is being carried out in accordance with the 
planned approach to the engagement; 
c. addressing significant findings and issues arising during the 
engagement, considering their significance, and modifying the 
planned approach appropriately; and 
d. identifying matters for consultation or consideration by 
engagement team members with appropriate levels of skill and 
proficiency in auditing, specialists, or both during the engagement. 


5.40 A review of the work performed includes consideration of whether 

a. the work has been performed in accordance with professional 
standards and applicable legal and regulatory requirements; 



b. significant findings and issues have been raised for further 
consideration; 
c. appropriate consultations have taken place and the resulting 
conclusions have been documented and implemented; 
d. the nature, timing, and extent of the work performed is appropriate 
and without need for revision; 
e. the work performed supports the conclusions reached and is 
appropriately documented; 
f. the evidence obtained is sufficient and appropriate to support the 
report; and 
g. the objectives of the engagement procedures have been 
achieved. 


5.41 In the case of a sole proprietor, the requirement for a second auditor 
to review work performed and related documentation may be achieved 
through alternative procedures. 

 

Monitoring of Quality 




Requirements: Monitoring of Quality 

5.42 The audit organization should establish policies and procedures 
for monitoring its system of quality control. 

5.43 The audit organization should perform monitoring procedures that 
enable it to assess compliance with professional standards and quality 
control policies and procedures for GAGAS engagements. Individuals 
performing monitoring should have sufficient expertise and authority 
within the audit organization. 

5.44 The audit organization should analyze and summarize the results 
of its monitoring process at least annually, with identification of any 
systemic or repetitive issues needing improvement, along with 
recommendations for corrective action. The audit organization should 
communicate to the relevant engagement partner or director, and other 
appropriate personnel, any deficiencies noted during the monitoring 
process and recommend appropriate remedial action. This 




communication should be sufficient to enable the audit organization 
and appropriate personnel to take prompt corrective action related to 
deficiencies, when necessary, in accordance with their defined roles 
and responsibilities. Information communicated should include the 
following: 

a. a description of the monitoring procedures performed; 
b. the conclusions reached from the monitoring procedures; and 
c. when relevant, a description of systemic, repetitive, or other 
deficiencies and of the actions taken to resolve those 
deficiencies. 


5.45 The audit organization should evaluate the effects of deficiencies 
noted during monitoring of the audit organization’s system of quality 
control to determine and implement appropriate actions to address the 
deficiencies. This evaluation should include assessments to determine 
if the deficiencies noted indicate that the audit organization’s system of 
quality control is insufficient to provide it with reasonable assurance 
that it complies with professional standards and applicable legal and 
regulatory requirements, and that accordingly the reports that the audit 
organization issues are not appropriate in the circumstances. 

5.46 The audit organization should establish policies and procedures 
that require retention of engagement documentation for a period of 
time sufficient to permit those performing monitoring procedures and 
peer review of the organization to evaluate its compliance with its 
system of quality control or for a longer period if required by law or 
regulation. 



 

Application Guidance: Monitoring of Quality 

5.47 Monitoring of quality is a process comprising an ongoing 
consideration and evaluation of the audit organization’s system of quality 
control, including inspection of engagement documentation and reports 
for a selection of completed engagements. The purpose of monitoring is 
to provide management of the audit organization with reasonable 
assurance that (1) the policies and procedures related to the system of 
quality control are suitably designed and operating effectively in practice 
and (2) auditors have followed professional standards and applicable 
legal and regulatory requirements. 


5.48 Monitoring is most effective when performed by persons who do not 
have responsibility for the specific activity being monitored. 

5.49 Monitoring procedures will vary based on the audit organization’s 
facts and circumstances. 

5.50 Ongoing consideration and evaluation of the audit organization’s 
system of quality control may identify circumstances that necessitate 
changes to, or improve compliance with, the audit organization’s policies 
and procedures to provide the audit organization with reasonable 
assurance that its system of quality control is effective. 

5.51 Ongoing consideration and evaluation of the audit organization’s 
system of quality control may include matters such as the following: 

a. review of selected administrative and human resource records 
pertaining to the quality control elements; 
b. review of engagement documentation and reports; 
c. discussions with the audit organization’s personnel; 
d. determination of corrective actions to be taken and improvements 
to be made in the system, including providing feedback on the 
audit organization’s policies and procedures relating to education 
and training; 
e. communication to appropriate audit organization personnel of 
weaknesses identified in the system, in the level of understanding 
of the system, or compliance with the system; and 
f. follow-up by appropriate audit organization personnel so that 
necessary modifications are promptly made to the quality control 
policies and procedures. 


5.52 Monitoring procedures may also include an assessment of the 
following: 

a. the appropriateness of the audit organization’s guidance materials 
and any practice aids; 



b. new developments in professional standards and applicable legal 
and regulatory requirements and how they are reflected in the 
audit organization’s policies and procedures, when appropriate; 
c. written affirmation of compliance with policies and procedures on 
independence; 
d. the effectiveness of staff training; 
e. decisions related to acceptance and continuance of relationships 
with audited entities and specific engagements; and 
f. audit organization personnel’s understanding of the organization’s 
quality control policies and procedures and implementation 
thereof. 


5.53 Reviews of the work by engagement team members prior to the date 
of the report are not monitoring procedures. 

5.54 The extent of inspection procedures depends, in part, on the 
existence and effectiveness of the other monitoring procedures. 
Inspection is a retrospective evaluation of the adequacy of the audit 
organization’s quality control policies and procedures, its personnel’s 
understanding of those policies and procedures, and the extent of the 
audit organization’s compliance with them. The nature of inspection 
procedures varies based on the audit organization’s quality control 
policies and procedures and the effectiveness and results of other 
monitoring procedures. 

5.55 The inspection of a selection of completed engagements may be 
performed on a cyclical basis. The manner in which the inspection cycle 
is organized, including the timing of selection of individual engagements, 
depends on many factors, such as the following: 

a. the size of the audit organization; 
b. the number and geographical location of offices; 
c. the results of previous monitoring procedures; 
d. the degree of authority of both personnel and office (for example, 
whether individual offices are authorized to conduct their own 
inspections or whether only the head office may conduct them); 



e. the nature and complexity of the audit organization’s practice and 
structure; and 
f. the risks associated with entities audited by the audit organization 
and specific engagements. 


5.56 The inspection process involves the selection of individual 
engagements, some of which may be selected without prior notification to 
the engagement team. In determining the scope of the inspections, the 
audit organization may take into account the scope or conclusions of a 
peer review or regulatory inspections. 

5.57 Reporting of identified deficiencies to individuals other than the 
relevant engagement partner or director need not include identifying the 
specific engagements concerned, unless such identification is necessary 
for individuals other than the engagement partner or director to properly 
discharge their responsibilities. 

5.58 Whether engagement documentation is in paper, electronic, or other 
form, the integrity, accessibility, and retrievability of the underlying 
information could be compromised if the documentation is altered, added 
to, or deleted without the auditors’ knowledge or if the documentation is 
lost or damaged. 

5.59 Appropriate documentation relating to monitoring may include, for 
example, the following: 

a. monitoring procedures, including the procedure for selecting 
completed engagements to be inspected; 
b. a record of the evaluation of the following: 
(1) adherence to professional standards and applicable legal 
and regulatory requirements, 
(2) whether the system of quality control has been 
appropriately designed and is effectively implemented and 
operating, and 
(3) whether the audit organization’s quality control policies and 
procedures have been appropriately applied so that the 
reports that are issued by the audit organization are 
appropriate in the circumstances; and 



c. identification of the deficiencies noted, an evaluation of their 
effect, and the basis for determining whether and what further 
action is necessary. 


 


External Peer Review 



Requirements: General 

5.60 Each audit organization conducting engagements in accordance 
with GAGAS must obtain an external peer review conducted by 
reviewers independent of the audit organization being reviewed. The 
peer review should be sufficient in scope to provide a reasonable basis 
for determining whether, for the period under review, (1) the reviewed 
audit organization’s system of quality control was suitably designed 
and (2) the organization is complying with its quality control system so 
that it has reasonable assurance that it is performing and reporting in 
conformity with professional standards and applicable legal and 
regulatory requirements in all material respects. 

5.61 Audit organizations affiliated with one of the following recognized 
organizations should comply with the respective organization’s peer 
review requirements and the requirements listed throughout 
paragraphs 5.66 through 5.80. 

a. American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 
b. Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency 
c. Association of Local Government Auditors 
d. International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions 
e. National State Auditors Association 


5.62 Any audit organization not affiliated with an organization listed in 
paragraph 5.61 should meet the minimum GAGAS peer review 
requirements throughout paragraphs 5.66 through 5.94. 



 

Application Guidance: General 

5.63 Each audit organization has discretion in selecting and accepting its 
peer review teams. Auditors in governments or jurisdictions without 
access to established peer review programs may engage other auditors, 


including public accounting firms, to conduct their peer reviews. If access 
to an established peer review program is not available, auditors may 
organize regional programs with other auditors. 

5.64 In cases of unusual difficulty or hardship, extensions of the deadlines 
for submitting peer review reports exceeding 3 months beyond the due 
date may be granted by the entity that administers the peer review 
program with the concurrence of GAO. 

5.65 Some audit organizations may be subject to or required to follow a 
peer review program of a recognized organization. Other audit 
organizations may follow a specific peer review program voluntarily. In 
instances where the audit organization follows a recognized 
organization’s peer review program voluntarily, the use of such a peer 
review program means compliance with the recognized organization’s 
entire peer review process, including, where applicable, standards for 
administering, performing, and reporting on peer reviews, oversight 
procedures, training, and related guidance materials. 

Requirements: Assessment of Peer Review Risk 

5.66 The peer review team should perform an assessment of peer 
review risk to help determine the number and types of engagements to 
select for review. 

5.67 Based on the risk assessment, the peer review team should 
select engagements that provide a reasonable cross section of all 
types of work subject to the reviewed audit organization’s quality 
control system, including one or more engagements conducted in 
accordance with GAGAS. 



 

Application Guidance: Assessment of Peer Review Risk 

5.68 Peer review risk is the risk that the review team 

a. fails to identify significant weaknesses in the reviewed audit 
organization’s system of quality control for its auditing practice, its 
lack of compliance with that system, or a combination thereof; 
b. issues an inappropriate opinion on the reviewed audit 
organization’s system of quality control for its auditing practice, its 
compliance with that system, or a combination thereof; or 



c. makes an inappropriate decision about the matters to be included 
in, or excluded from, the peer review report. 


5.69 A selection approach that provides a cross section of all types of 
work is generally applicable to audit organizations that conduct a small 
number of GAGAS engagements in relation to other types of 
engagements. In these cases, one or more GAGAS engagements may 
represent more than what would be selected when looking at a cross 
section of the audit organization’s work as a whole. Some audit 
organizations conduct audit and attestation work in a number of functional 
areas. For example, an organization may conduct financial audits, 
attestation engagements, reviews of financial statements, and 
performance audits. The peer review team may consider reviewing a 
sample of engagements from each of the major functional areas included 
within the scope of the review. 

5.70 A peer review is designed to test significant risk areas where it is 
possible that engagements are not being conducted, reported on, or both 
in conformity with professional standards and applicable legal and 
regulatory requirements in all material respects. A peer review is not 
designed to test every engagement, compliance with every professional 
standard, or every detailed component of the audit organization’s system 
of quality control. 

5.71 Examples of the factors that may be considered when performing an 
assessment of risk for selecting engagements for peer review include 

a. scope of the engagements, including size of the audited entity or 
engagements covering multiple locations; 
b. functional area or type of government program; 
c. types of engagements conducted, including the extent of nonaudit 
services provided to audited entities; 
d. personnel (including use of new personnel or personnel not 
routinely assigned the types of engagements conducted); 
e. initial engagements; 
f. familiarity resulting from a long-standing relationship with the 
audited entity; 



g. political sensitivity of the engagements; 
h. budget constraints faced by the audit organization that could 
negatively affect engagement quality; 
i. results of the peer review team’s review of the design of system of 
quality control; 
j. results of the audit organization’s monitoring process; and 
k. overall risk tolerance within the audit organization that could 
negatively affect engagement quality. 


Requirements: Peer Review Report Ratings 

5.72 The peer review team should use professional judgment in 
deciding on the type of peer review rating to issue; the ratings are as 
follows: 

a. Peer review rating of pass: A conclusion that the audit 
organization’s system of quality control has been suitably 
designed and complied with to provide the audit organization 
with reasonable assurance of performing and reporting in 
conformity with professional standards and applicable legal and 
regulatory requirements in all material respects. 
b. Peer review rating of pass with deficiencies: A conclusion that 
the audit organization’s system of quality control has been 
suitably designed and complied with to provide the audit 
organization with reasonable assurance of performing and 
reporting in conformity with professional standards and 
applicable legal and regulatory requirements in all material 
respects with the exception of a certain deficiency or 
deficiencies described in the report. 


 

c. Peer review rating of fail: A conclusion, based on the significant 
deficiencies described in the report, that the audit organization’s 
system of quality control is not suitably designed to provide the 
audit organization with reasonable assurance of performing and 
reporting in conformity with professional standards and 
applicable legal and regulatory requirements in all material 
respects, or that the audit organization has not complied with its 





system of quality control to provide the audit organization with 
reasonable assurance of performing and reporting in conformity 
with professional standards and applicable legal and regulatory 
requirements in all material respects. 


 

5.73 The peer review team should determine the type of peer review 
rating to issue based on the observed matters’ importance to the audit 
organization’s system of quality control as a whole and the nature, 
causes, patterns, and pervasiveness of those matters. The matters 
should be assessed both alone and in aggregate. 

5.74 The peer review team should aggregate and systematically 
evaluate any observed matters (circumstances that warrant further 
consideration by the peer review team) and document its evaluation.37 
The peer review team should perform its evaluation and issue report 
ratings as follows: 

a. If the peer review team’s evaluation of observed matters does 
not identify any findings (more than a remote possibility that the 
reviewed audit organization would not perform, report, or both in 
conformity with professional standards and applicable legal and 
regulatory requirements), or identifies findings that are not 
considered to be deficiencies, the peer review team issues a 
pass rating. 
b. If the peer review team’s evaluation of findings identified 
deficiencies but did not identify any significant deficiencies, the 
peer review team issues a pass with deficiencies rating and 
communicates the deficiencies in its report. 
c. If the peer review team’s evaluation of deficiencies identified 
significant deficiencies, the peer review team issues a fail rating 
and communicates the deficiencies and significant deficiencies 
in its report. 




37See fig. 3 for a flowchart on developing peer review communications for observed 
matters in accordance with GAGAS. 

 


Application Guidance: Peer Review Report Ratings 

5.75 Deficiencies are findings that because of their nature, causes, 
pattern, or pervasiveness, including their relative importance to the audit 
organization’s system of quality control taken as a whole, could create a 
situation in which the audit organization would not have reasonable 
assurance of performing, reporting, or both in conformity with professional 
standards and applicable legal and regulatory requirements in one or 
more important respects. 

5.76 Significant deficiencies are one or more deficiencies that the peer 
review team concludes result from a condition in the audit organization’s 
system of quality control or compliance with that system such that the 
system taken as a whole does not provide reasonable assurance of 
performing, reporting, or both in conformity with professional standards 
and applicable legal and regulatory requirements. 

Requirements: Availability of the Peer Review Report to the 
Public 

5.77 An external audit organization should make its most recent peer 
review report publicly available. If a separate communication detailing 
findings, conclusions, and recommendations is issued, the external 
audit organization is not required to make that communication publicly 
available. An internal audit organization that reports internally to 
management and those charged with governance should provide a 
copy of its peer review report to those charged with governance. 

5.78 An external audit organization should satisfy the publication 
requirement for its peer review report by posting the report on a 
publicly available website or to a publicly available file. Alternatively, if 
neither of these options is available, then the audit organization 
should use the same mechanism it uses to make other reports or 
documents public. 

5.79 Because information in peer review reports may be relevant to 
decisions on procuring audit services, an audit organization seeking to 
enter into a contract to conduct an engagement in accordance with 
GAGAS should provide the following to the party contracting for such 
services when requested: 




a. the audit organization’s most recent peer review report and 
b. any subsequent peer review reports received during the period 
of the contract. 


5.80 Auditors who are using another audit organization’s work should 
request a copy of that organization’s most recent peer review report, 
and the organization should provide this document when it is 
requested. 



 

Application Guidance: Availability of the Peer Review Report to the 
Public 

5.81 To help the public understand the peer review reports, an audit 
organization may include a description of the peer review process and 
how it applies to its organization. Examples of additional information that 
audit organizations may include to help users understand the meaning of 
the peer review report follow: 

a. Explanation of the peer review process. 
b. Description of the audit organization’s system of quality control. 
c. Explanation of the relationship of the peer review results to the 
audited organization’s work. 
d. If a peer review report is issued with a rating of pass with 
deficiencies or fail, explanation of the reviewed audit 
organization’s plan for improving quality controls and the status of 
the improvements. 


 

Additional Requirements 
for Audit Organizations 
Not Affiliated with 
Recognized Organizations 




Requirement: Peer Review Scope 

5.82 The peer review team should include the following elements in 
the scope of the peer review: 

a. review of the audit organization’s design of, and compliance 
with, quality control and related policies and procedures; 





b. consideration of the adequacy and results of the audit 
organization’s internal monitoring procedures; 
c. review of selected audit reports and related documentation and, 
if applicable, documentation related to selected terminated 
engagements prepared in accordance with paragraph 5.25, if 
any terminated engagements are selected from the universe of 
engagements used for the peer review sample; 
d. review of prior peer review reports, if applicable; 
e. review of other documents necessary for assessing compliance 
with standards, for example, independence documentation, CPE 
records, and relevant human resource management files; and 
f. interviews with selected members of the audit organization’s 
personnel in various roles to assess their understanding of and 
compliance with relevant quality control policies and procedures. 




 

Application Guidance: Peer Review Scope 

5.83 Review of documentation related to terminated engagements can 
provide information on the audit organization’s response to threats to 
independence. For example, the documentation may include information 
on whether an engagement was terminated as a result of an undue 
influence from outside the audit organization. 

Requirement: Peer Review Intervals 

5.84 An audit organization not already subject to a peer review 
requirement should obtain an external peer review at least once every 
3 years. The audit organization should obtain its first peer review 
covering a review period ending no later than 3 years from the date an 
audit organization begins its first engagement in accordance with 
GAGAS. 



 

Application Guidance: Peer Review Intervals 

5.85 The period under review in a peer review generally covers 1 year. 


Requirement: Written Agreement for Peer Review 

5.86 The peer review team and the reviewed audit organization should 
incorporate their basic agreement on the peer review into a written 
agreement. The written agreement should be drafted by the peer 
review team, reviewed by the reviewed audit organization to ensure 
that it accurately describes the agreement between the parties, and 
signed by the authorized representatives of both the peer review team 
and the reviewed audit organization prior to the initiation of work under 
the agreement. The written agreement should state that the peer 
review will be conducted in accordance with GAGAS peer review 
requirements. 



 

Application Guidance: Written Agreement for Peer Review 

5.87 The written agreement is meant to ensure mutual consent on the 
fundamental aspects of the peer review and to avoid any potential 
misunderstandings. The written agreement may address the following: 

a. scope of the peer review; 
b. staffing and time frame; 
c. compensation for conducting the peer review, if applicable; 
d. preliminary findings, if applicable; 
e. reporting results; 
f. administrative matters; and 
g. access to audit documentation. 


5.88 The peer review team is responsible for ensuring that the peer 
review is conducted in accordance with GAGAS peer review 
requirements. 

 


Requirement: Peer Review Team 

5.89 The peer review team should meet the following criteria: 

a. The review team collectively has adequate professional 
competence and knowledge of GAGAS and government 
auditing. 
b. The organization conducting the peer review and individual 
review team members are independent (as defined in GAGAS) 
of the audit organization being reviewed, its personnel, and the 
engagements selected for the peer review.38 
c. The review team collectively has sufficient knowledge to 
conduct a peer review. 




38See paras. 3.18 through 3.108 for discussion of independence. 

 

Application Guidance: Peer Review Team 

5.90 Peer review knowledge and professional competence may be 
obtained from on-the-job training, training courses, or a combination of 
both. Having individuals on the peer review team with prior experience on 
a peer review or internal inspection team is desirable. 

Requirement: Report Content 

5.91 The peer review team should prepare one or more written reports 
communicating the results of the peer review, which collectively 
include the following elements: 

a. a description of the scope of the peer review, including any 
limitations; 
b. a rating concluding on whether the system of quality control of 
the reviewed audit organization was adequately designed and 
complied with during the period reviewed and would provide the 
audit organization with reasonable assurance that it conformed 
to professional standards and applicable legal and regulatory 





requirements; 
c. specification of the professional standards and applicable legal 
and regulatory requirements to which the reviewed audit 
organization is being held; 
d. reference to a separate written communication, if issued under 
the peer review program; 
e. a statement that the peer review was conducted in accordance 
with GAGAS peer review requirements; and 
f. a detailed description of the findings, conclusions, and 
recommendations related to any deficiencies or significant 
deficiencies identified in the review. 




 

Application Guidance: Report Content 

5.92 When the scope of the peer review is limited by conditions that 
preclude the application of one or more peer review procedures 
considered necessary in the circumstances and the peer review team 
cannot accomplish the objectives of those procedures through alternative 
procedures, the report can be modified by including a statement in the 
report’s scope paragraph, body, and opinion paragraph. The statement 
describes the relationship of the excluded engagement(s) or functional 
area(s) to the reviewed audit organization’s full scope of practice as a 
whole and system of quality control and the effects of the exclusion on the 
scope and results of the review. 

Requirements: Audit Organization’s Response to the Peer Review 
Report 

5.93 If the reviewed audit organization receives a report with a peer 
review rating of pass with deficiencies or fail, the reviewed audit 
organization should respond in writing to the deficiencies or significant 
deficiencies and related recommendations identified in the report. 

5.94 With respect to each deficiency or significant deficiency in the 
report, the reviewed audit organization should describe in its letter of 
response the corrective actions already taken, target dates for planned 
corrective actions, or both. 




Application Guidance: Audit Organization’s Response to the Peer 
Review Report 

5.95 When an audit organization receives a peer review rating of pass 
with deficiencies or fail that relates to its GAGAS engagements, critical 
evaluation of the design and implementation of the system of quality 
control is a factor in determining the audit organization’s ability to accept 
and perform future GAGAS engagements. 


Figure 3: Developing Peer Review Communications for Observed Matters in Accordance with Generally Accepted 
Government Auditing Standards 

 


 


Chapter 6: Standards for Financial Audits 



6.01 This chapter contains requirements and guidance for conducting and 
reporting on financial audits conducted in accordance with generally 
accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS). GAGAS incorporates 
by reference the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ 
(AICPA) Statements on Auditing Standards (SAS).39 All sections of the 
SAS are incorporated, including the introduction, objectives, definitions, 
requirements, and application material. GAGAS does not incorporate the 
AICPA Code of Professional Conduct by reference but recognizes that 
certain certified public accountants (CPA) may use or may be required to 
use the code in conjunction with GAGAS.40 For financial audits conducted 
in accordance with GAGAS, the requirements and guidance in the 
incorporated SAS and this chapter apply. The requirements and guidance 
contained in chapters 1 through 5 also apply. 

39See para. 2.13 and the AICPA Codification of Statements on Auditing Standards (AU-C) 
for additional discussion of the relationship between GAGAS and other professional 
standards. 

40See para. 2.14 for a discussion of the AICPA Code of Professional Conduct. 

41See AU-C section 320, Materiality in Planning and Performing an Audit (AICPA, 
Professional Standards). 

 

Additional GAGAS 
Requirements for 
Conducting Financial 
Audits 




 

 

 

 


Compliance with 
Standards 



Requirement: Compliance with Standards 

6.02 GAGAS establishes requirements for financial audits in addition 
to the requirements in the AICPA SAS. Auditors should comply with 
these additional requirements, along with the AICPA requirements for 
financial audits, when citing GAGAS in financial audit reports. 



 

Application Guidance: Compliance with Standards 

6.03 Standards used in conjunction with GAGAS require the auditors to 
apply the concept of materiality appropriately in planning and performing 
the audit.41 Additional considerations may apply to GAGAS engagements 


that concern government entities or entities that receive government 
awards. For example, for engagements conducted in accordance with 
GAGAS, auditors may find it appropriate to use lower materiality levels 
than those used in non-GAGAS audits because of the public 
accountability of government entities and entities receiving government 
funding, various legal and regulatory requirements, and the visibility and 
sensitivity of government programs. 

 

Licensing and Certification 




Requirements: Licensing and Certification 

6.04 Auditors engaged to conduct financial audits in the United States 
who do not work for a government audit organization should be 
licensed CPAs, persons working for licensed certified public 
accounting firms, or licensed accountants in states that have multiclass 
licensing systems that recognize licensed accountants other than 
CPAs. 

6.05 Auditors engaged to conduct financial audits of entities operating 
outside of the United States who do not work for a government audit 
organization should meet the qualifications indicated in paragraph 
6.04, have certifications that meet all applicable national and 
international standards and serve in their respective countries as the 
functional equivalent of CPAs in the United States, or work for 
nongovernment audit organizations that are the functional equivalent 
of licensed certified public accounting firms in the United States. 



 

 

Auditor Communication 




Requirements: Auditor Communication 

6.06 If the law or regulation requiring an audit specifically identifies the 
entities to be audited, auditors should communicate pertinent 
information that in the auditors’ professional judgment needs to be 
communicated both to individuals contracting for or requesting the 
audit and to those legislative committees, if any, that have ongoing 
oversight responsibilities for the audited entity. 

6.07 If the identity of those charged with governance is not clearly 
evident, auditors should document the process followed and 




conclusions reached in identifying the appropriate individuals to 
receive the required communications. 



 

Application Guidance: Auditor Communication 

6.08 One example of a law or regulation requiring an audit that does not 
specifically identify the entities to be audited is the Single Audit Act 
Amendments of 1996. 

6.09 For some matters, early communication to management or those 
charged with governance may be important because of the relative 
significance and the urgency for corrective follow-up action.42 Further, 
early communication is important to allow management to take prompt 
corrective action to prevent further occurrences when a control deficiency 
results in identified or suspected noncompliance with provisions of laws, 
regulations, contracts, and grant agreements or identified or suspected 
instances of fraud. When a deficiency is communicated early, the 
reporting requirements and application guidance in paragraphs 6.39 
through 6.49 still apply. 

42See AU-C section 265, Communicating Internal Control Related Matters Identified in an 
Audit (AICPA, Professional Standards). 

6.10 Because the governance structures of government entities and 
organizations can vary widely, it may not always be clearly evident who is 
charged with key governance functions. The process for identifying those 
charged with governance includes evaluating the organizational structure 
for directing and controlling operations to achieve the audited entity’s 
objectives and how the audited entity delegates authority and establishes 
accountability for management. 

 

Results of Previous 
Engagements 




Requirement: Results of Previous Engagements 

6.11 When planning the audit, auditors should ask management of the 
audited entity to identify previous audits, attestation engagements, and 
other studies that directly relate to the objectives of the audit, including 
whether related recommendations have been implemented. Auditors 
should evaluate whether the audited entity has taken appropriate 




corrective action to address findings and recommendations from 
previous engagements that could have a significant effect on the 
subject matter. Auditors should use this information in assessing risk 
and determining the nature, timing, and extent of current audit work 
and determining the extent to which testing the implementation of the 
corrective actions is applicable to the current audit objectives. 



 

 

Investigations or Legal 
Proceedings 




Requirement: Investigations or Legal Proceedings 

6.12 Auditors should inquire of management of the audited entity 
whether any investigations or legal proceedings have been initiated or 
are in process with respect to the period under audit, and should 
evaluate the effect of initiated or in-process investigations or legal 
proceedings on the current audit. 



 

Application Guidance: Investigations or Legal Proceedings 

6.13 Laws, regulations, or policies may require auditors to communicate 
indications of certain types of fraud or noncompliance with provisions of 
laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements to law enforcement or 
investigatory authorities before performing additional audit procedures. 

6.14 Avoiding interference with investigations or legal proceedings is 
important in pursuing indications of fraud and noncompliance with 
provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements. In some 
cases, it may be appropriate for the auditors to work with investigators or 
legal authorities or to withdraw from or defer further work on the 
engagement or a portion of the engagement to avoid interfering with an 
ongoing investigation or legal proceeding. 

 

Noncompliance with 
Provisions of Laws, 
Regulations, Contracts, 
and Grant Agreements 




Requirement: Noncompliance with Provisions of Laws, 
Regulations, Contracts, and Grant Agreements 

6.15 Auditors should extend the AICPA requirements concerning 
consideration of noncompliance with laws and regulations to include 

 




Chapter 6: Standards for Financial Audits

consideration of noncompliance with provisions of contracts and grant 
agreements.43

Application Guidance: Noncompliance with Provisions of Laws, 
Regulations, Contracts, and Grant Agreements

6.16Government programs are subject to provisions of many laws, 
regulations, contracts, and grant agreements. At the same time, these 
provisions’significance within the context of the audit objectives varieswidely, depending on the objectives of the audit. Auditors may consult 
with their legal counselto (1) determine those laws and regulations thatare significant to the audit objectives, (2) design tests of compliance with 
laws and regulations, and (3) evaluate the results of those tests. Auditorsalso may consult with their legal counsel when audit objectives require 
testing compliance with provisions of contracts or grant agreements. 
Depending on the circumstances of the audit, auditors may consult with 
others, such as investigative staff, other audit organizationsorgovernment entities that provided professional services to the audited 
entity, or applicable law enforcement authorities, to obtain information on 
compliance matters.
Findings

Requirements: Findings

6.17 When auditors identify findings, they should plan and performprocedures to develop the criteria, condition, cause, and effect of the 
findings to the extent that these elements are relevant and necessaryto achieve the audit objectives.
6.18Auditors should consider internal control deficiencies in theirevaluation of identified findings when developing the cause element of 
the identified findings.
43See AU-C section 250,Consideration of Laws and Regulations in an Audit of Financial 
Statements(AICPA,Professional Standards).

Page 113GAO-21-368GGovernment Auditing Standards


Application Guidance: Findings 

6.19 Findings may involve deficiencies in internal control; noncompliance 
with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements; or 
instances of fraud. 

6.20 Given the concept of accountability for use of public resources and 
government authority, evaluating internal control in a government 
environment may also include considering internal control deficiencies 
that result in waste or abuse. Because the determination of waste and 
abuse is subjective, auditors are not required to perform specific 
procedures to detect waste or abuse in financial audits. However, 
auditors may consider whether and how to communicate such matters if 
they become aware of them. Auditors may also discover that waste or 
abuse are indicative of fraud or noncompliance with provisions of laws, 
regulations, contracts, and grant agreements. 

6.21 Waste is the act of using or expending resources carelessly, 
extravagantly, or to no purpose. Importantly, waste can include activities 
that do not include abuse and does not necessarily involve a violation of 
law. Rather, waste relates primarily to mismanagement, inappropriate 
actions, and inadequate oversight. 

6.22 The following are examples of waste, depending on the facts and 
circumstances: 

a. Making travel choices that are contrary to existing travel policies 
or are unnecessarily extravagant or expensive. 
b. Making procurement or vendor selections that are contrary to 
existing policies or are unnecessarily extravagant or expensive. 


6.23 Abuse is behavior that is deficient or improper when compared with 
behavior that a prudent person would consider reasonable and necessary 
business practice given the facts and circumstances, but excludes fraud 
and noncompliance with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and 
grant agreements. Abuse also includes misuse of authority or position for 
personal financial interests or those of an immediate or close family 
member or business associate. 

6.24 The following are examples of abuse, depending on the facts and 
circumstances: 


a. Creating unneeded overtime. 
b. Requesting staff to perform personal errands or work tasks for a 
supervisor or manager. 
c. Misusing the official’s position for personal gain (including actions 
that could be perceived by an objective third party with knowledge 
of the relevant information as improperly benefiting an official’s 
personal financial interests or those of an immediate or close 
family member; a general partner; an organization for which the 
official serves as an officer, director, trustee, or employee; or an 
organization with which the official is negotiating concerning future 
employment). 


6.25 Criteria: For inclusion in findings, criteria may include the laws, 
regulations, contracts, grant agreements, standards, measures, expected 
performance, defined business practices, and benchmarks against which 
performance is compared or evaluated. Criteria identify the required or 
desired state or expectation with respect to the program or operation. 
Criteria provide a context for evaluating evidence and understanding the 
findings, conclusions, and recommendations in the report. In a financial 
audit, the applicable financial reporting framework, such as generally 
accepted accounting principles, represents one set of criteria. 

6.26 Condition: Condition is a situation that exists. The condition is 
determined and documented during the audit. 

6.27 Cause: The cause is the factor or factors responsible for the 
difference between the condition and the criteria, and may also serve as a 
basis for recommendations for corrective actions. Common factors 
include poorly designed policies, procedures, or criteria; inconsistent, 
incomplete, or incorrect implementation; or factors beyond the control of 
program management. Auditors may assess whether the evidence 
provides a reasonable and convincing argument for why the stated cause 
is the key factor contributing to the difference between the condition and 
the criteria. 

6.28 Effect or potential effect: The effect or potential effect is the outcome 
or consequence resulting from the difference between the condition and 
the criteria. When the audit objectives include identifying the actual or 
potential consequences of a condition that varies (either positively or 
negatively) from the criteria identified in the audit, effect is a measure of 
those consequences. Effect or potential effect may be used to 


demonstrate the need for corrective action in response to identified 
problems or relevant risks. 

6.29 Regardless of the type of finding identified, the cause of a finding 
may relate to one or more underlying internal control deficiencies. 
Depending on the magnitude of impact, likelihood of occurrence, and 
nature of the deficiency, the deficiency could be a significant deficiency or 
material weakness in a financial audit.44 

44See AU-C section 265, Communicating Internal Control Related Matters Identified in an 
Audit (AICPA, Professional Standards). 

45Para. .A16 of AU-C section 940, An Audit of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting 
That Is Integrated With an Audit of Financial Statements (AICPA, Professional Standards) 
indicates that the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission’s 
Internal Control—Integrated Framework and Standards for Internal Control in the Federal 
Government (GAO-14-704G) provide suitable and available criteria against which 
management may evaluate and report on the effectiveness of the entity’s internal control 
over financial reporting. Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government may be 
adopted by entities beyond those federal entities for which it is legally required, such as 
state, local, and quasi-governmental entities, as well as other federal entities and not-for-
profit organizations, as a framework for an internal control system. 

6.30 Considering internal control in the context of a comprehensive 
internal control framework, such as Standards for Internal Control in the 
Federal Government or Internal Control—Integrated Framework,45 can 
help auditors to determine whether underlying internal control deficiencies 
exist as the root cause of findings. Identifying these deficiencies can help 
provide the basis for developing meaningful recommendations for 
corrective actions. 

 

 

Audit Documentation 




Requirements: Audit Documentation 

6.31 Auditors should document supervisory review, before the report 
release date, of the evidence that supports the findings and 
conclusions contained in the audit report. 

6.32 Auditors should document any departures from the GAGAS 
requirements and the effect on the audit and on the auditors’ 
conclusions when the audit is not in compliance with applicable 
GAGAS requirements because of law, regulation, scope limitations, 
restrictions on access to records, or other issues affecting the audit. 




Application Guidance: Audit Documentation 

6.33 When documenting departures from the GAGAS requirements, the 
audit documentation requirements apply to departures from unconditional 
requirements and from presumptively mandatory requirements when 
alternative procedures performed in the circumstances were not sufficient 
to achieve the objectives of the requirements. 

 

Availability of Individuals 
and Documentation 




Requirement: Availability of Individuals and Documentation 

6.34 Subject to applicable provisions of laws and regulations, auditors 
should make appropriate individuals and audit documentation available 
upon request and in a timely manner to other auditors or reviewers. 



 

Application Guidance: Availability of Individuals and Documentation 

6.35 Underlying GAGAS audits is the premise that audit organizations in 
federal, state, and local governments and public accounting firms 
engaged to conduct financial audits in accordance with GAGAS 
cooperate in auditing programs of common interest so that auditors may 
use others’ work and avoid duplication of efforts. The use of auditors’ 
work by other auditors may be facilitated by contractual arrangements for 
GAGAS audits that provide for full and timely access to appropriate 
individuals and to audit documentation. 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Additional GAGAS 
Requirements for 
Reporting on 
Financial Audits 



 

 

 

 


Reporting the Auditors’ 
Compliance with GAGAS 



Requirement: Reporting the Auditors’ Compliance with GAGAS 

6.36 When auditors comply with all applicable GAGAS requirements, 
they should include a statement in the audit report that they conducted 
the audit in accordance with GAGAS.46 



46See paras. 2.16 through 2.19 for information on the GAGAS compliance statement. 

47See AU-C section 700, Forming an Opinion and Reporting on Financial Statements 
(AICPA, Professional Standards). 

48See AU-C section 705, Modifications to the Opinion in the Independent Auditor’s Report 
(AICPA, Professional Standards). 

 

Application Guidance: Reporting the Auditors’ Compliance with 
GAGAS 

6.37 Because GAGAS incorporates by reference the AICPA’s financial 
audit standards, GAGAS does not require auditors to cite compliance with 
the AICPA standards when citing compliance with GAGAS. GAGAS does 
not prohibit auditors from issuing a separate report conforming only to the 
requirements of the AICPA or other standards.47 

6.38 When disclaiming an opinion on a financial audit, auditors may 
revise the statement that the auditor was engaged to audit the financial 
statements.48 For example, auditors may state that they were engaged to 
conduct the audit in accordance with GAGAS or that the auditors’ work 
was conducted in accordance with GAGAS, depending on whether the 
use of GAGAS is required or voluntary. Determining how to revise this 
statement is a matter of professional judgment. 

 


Reporting on Internal 
Control; Compliance with 
Provisions of Laws, 
Regulations, Contracts, 
and Grant Agreements; 
and Instances of Fraud 




Requirements: Reporting on Internal Control; Compliance with 
Provisions of Laws, Regulations, Contracts, and Grant 
Agreements; and Instances of Fraud 

6.39 Auditors should report on internal control and compliance with 
provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, or grant agreements 
regardless of whether they identify internal control deficiencies or 
instances of noncompliance. 

6.40 When providing an opinion or a disclaimer on financial 
statements, auditors should report as findings any significant 
deficiencies or material weaknesses in internal control over financial 
reporting that the auditors identified based on the engagement work 
performed. 

6.41 Auditors should include in their report on internal control or 
compliance the relevant information about noncompliance and fraud 
when auditors, based on sufficient, appropriate evidence, identify or 
suspect 

a. noncompliance with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, 
or grant agreements that has a material effect on the financial 
statements or other financial data significant to the audit 
objectives or 
b. fraud that is material, either quantitatively or qualitatively, to the 
financial statements or other financial data significant to the 
audit objectives. 


6.42 Auditors should include either in the same or in separate report(s) 
a description of the scope of the auditors’ testing of internal control 
over financial reporting and of compliance with provisions of laws, 
regulations, contracts, and grant agreements. Auditors should also 
state in the report(s) whether the tests they performed provided 
sufficient, appropriate evidence to support opinions on the 
effectiveness of internal control and on compliance with provisions of 
laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements. 

6.43 If auditors report separately (including separate reports bound in 
the same document) on internal control over financial reporting and on 
compliance with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant 




agreements, they should include a reference in the audit report on the 
financial statements to those additional reports. They should also state 
in the audit report that the reports on internal control over financial 
reporting and on compliance with provisions of laws, regulations, 
contracts, and grant agreements are an integral part of a GAGAS audit 
in considering the audited entity’s internal control over financial 
reporting and compliance. If separate reports are used, the auditors 
should make the report on internal control and compliance available to 
users in the same manner as the financial audit report to which it 
relates. 

6.44 Auditors should communicate in writing to audited entity officials 
when 

a. identified or suspected noncompliance with provisions of laws, 
regulations, contracts, or grant agreements comes to the 
auditor’s attention during the course of an audit that has an 
effect on the financial statements or other financial data 
significant to the audit objectives that is less than material but 
warrants the attention of those charged with governance or 
b. the auditor has obtained evidence of identified or suspected 
instances of fraud that have an effect on the financial 
statements or other financial data significant to the audit 
objectives that are less than material but warrant the attention 
of those charged with governance. 




 

Application Guidance: Reporting on Internal Control; Compliance 
with Provisions of Laws, Regulations, Contracts, and Grant 
Agreements; and Instances of Fraud 

6.45 The GAGAS requirement to report on internal control over financial 
reporting is based on the AICPA requirements to communicate in writing 
to those charged with governance significant deficiencies and material 
weaknesses in internal control over financial reporting identified during an 
audit. The objective of the GAGAS internal control reporting requirement 
for financial audits is to increase the availability of information on 
significant deficiencies and material weaknesses to users of financial 
statements other than those charged with governance. 

6.46 Internal control plays an expanded role in the government sector. 
Given the government’s accountability for public resources, assessing 


internal control in a government environment may involve considering 
controls that would not be required in the private sector. In the 
government sector, evaluating controls that are relevant to the audit 
involves understanding significant controls that the audited entity 
designed, implemented, and operated as part of its responsibility for 
oversight of public resources. 

6.47 The audit report on internal control and compliance with provisions 
of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements relates only to the 
most recent reporting period included, when comparative financial 
statements are presented. 

6.48 When identified or suspected noncompliance with provisions of laws, 
regulations, contracts, or grant agreements that does not warrant the 
attention of those charged with governance comes to the auditor’s 
attention during the course of the audit, the auditors’ determination of how 
to communicate such instances to audited entity officials is a matter of 
professional judgment. When identified or suspected noncompliance with 
provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, or grant agreements is clearly 
inconsequential, the auditors’ determination of whether and how to 
communicate such instances to audited entity officials is a matter of 
professional judgment. 

6.49 When auditors identify or suspect noncompliance with provisions of 
laws, regulations, contracts, or grant agreements or instances of fraud, 
auditors may consult with authorities or legal counsel about whether 
publicly reporting such information would compromise investigative or 
legal proceedings. Auditors may limit their public reporting to matters that 
would not compromise those proceedings and, for example, report only 
on information that is already a part of the public record. 

 

Presenting Findings in the 
Audit Report 




Requirements: Presenting Findings in the Audit Report 

6.50 When presenting findings, auditors should develop the elements 
of the findings to the extent necessary to assist management or 
oversight officials of the audited entity in understanding the need for 
corrective action. 

6.51 Auditors should place their findings in perspective by describing 
the nature and extent of the issues being reported and the extent of 




the work performed that resulted in the finding. To give the reader a 
basis for judging the prevalence and consequences of these findings, 
auditors should, as appropriate, relate the instances identified to the 
population or the number of cases examined and quantify the results in 
terms of dollar value or other measures. If the results cannot be 
projected, auditors should limit their conclusions appropriately. 



 

Application Guidance: Presenting Findings in the Audit Report 

6.52 Along with assisting management or oversight officials of the audited 
entity in understanding the need for corrective action, clearly developed 
findings assist auditors in making recommendations for corrective action. 
If auditors sufficiently develop the elements of a finding, they may provide 
recommendations for corrective action. 

 

Reporting Findings 
Directly to Parties outside 
the Audited Entity 




Requirements: Reporting Findings Directly to Parties outside the 
Audited Entity 

6.53 Auditors should report identified or suspected noncompliance with 
provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements and 
instances of fraud directly to parties outside the audited entity in the 
following two circumstances. 

a. When audited entity management fails to satisfy legal or 
regulatory requirements to report such information to external 
parties specified in law or regulation, auditors should first 
communicate the failure to report such information to those 
charged with governance. If the audited entity still does not 
report this information to the specified external parties as soon 
as practicable after the auditors’ communication with those 
charged with governance, then the auditors should report the 
information directly to the specified external parties. 
b. When audited entity management fails to take timely and 
appropriate steps to respond to fraud or noncompliance with 
provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant 
agreements that (1) is likely to have a material effect on the 
subject matter and (2) involves funding received directly or 
indirectly from a government agency, auditors should first 




 



report management’s failure to take timely and appropriate 
steps to those charged with governance. If the audited entity 
still does not take timely and appropriate steps as soon as 
practicable after the auditors’ communication with those 
charged with governance, then the auditors should report the 
audited entity’s failure to take timely and appropriate steps 
directly to the funding agency. 


6.54 Auditors should comply with the requirements in paragraph 6.53 
even if they have resigned or been dismissed from the audit prior to its 
completion. 

6.55 Auditors should obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence, such as 
confirmation from outside parties, to corroborate representations by 
management of the audited entity that it has reported audit findings in 
accordance with provisions of laws, regulations, or funding 
agreements. When auditors are unable to do so, they should report 
such information directly as discussed in paragraphs 6.53 and 6.54. 



 

Application Guidance: Reporting Findings Directly to Parties outside 
the Audited Entity 

6.56 The reporting in paragraph 6.53 is in addition to any legal 
requirements to report such information directly to parties outside the 
audited entity. 

 

Obtaining and Reporting 
the Views of Responsible 
Officials 




Requirements: Obtaining and Reporting the Views of Responsible 
Officials 

6.57 Auditors should obtain and report the views of responsible 
officials of the audited entity concerning the findings, conclusions, and 
recommendations in the audit report, as well as any planned corrective 
actions. 

6.58 When auditors receive written comments from the responsible 
officials, they should include in their report a copy of the officials’ 
written comments or a summary of the comments received. When the 
responsible officials provide oral comments only, auditors should 
prepare a summary of the oral comments, provide a copy of the 




summary to the responsible officials to verify that the comments are 
accurately represented, and include the summary in their report. 

6.59 When the audited entity’s comments are inconsistent or in conflict 
with the findings, conclusions, or recommendations in the draft report, 
the auditors should evaluate the validity of the audited entity’s 
comments. If the auditors disagree with the comments, they should 
explain in the report their reasons for disagreement. Conversely, the 
auditors should modify their report as necessary if they find the 
comments valid and supported by sufficient, appropriate evidence. 

6.60 If the audited entity refuses to provide comments or is unable to 
provide comments within a reasonable period of time, the auditors 
should issue the report without receiving comments from the audited 
entity. In such cases, the auditors should indicate in the report that the 
audited entity did not provide comments. 



 

Application Guidance: Obtaining and Reporting the Views of 
Responsible Officials 

6.61 Providing a draft report with findings for review and comment by 
responsible officials of the audited entity and others helps the auditors 
develop a report that is fair, complete, and objective. Including the views 
of responsible officials results in a report that presents not only the 
auditors’ findings, conclusions, and recommendations but also the 
perspectives of the audited entity’s responsible officials and the corrective 
actions they plan to take. Obtaining the comments in writing is preferred, 
but oral comments are acceptable. In cases in which the audited entity 
provides technical comments in addition to its written or oral comments 
on the report, auditors may disclose in the report that such comments 
were received. Technical comments address points of fact or are editorial 
in nature and do not address substantive issues, such as methodology, 
findings, conclusions, or recommendations. 

6.62 Obtaining oral comments may be appropriate when, for example, 
there is a reporting date critical to meeting a user’s needs; auditors have 
worked closely with the responsible officials throughout the engagement, 
and the parties are familiar with the findings and issues addressed in the 
draft report; or the auditors do not expect major disagreements with 
findings, conclusions, or recommendations in the draft report or major 
controversies with regard to the issues discussed in the draft report. 


Reporting Confidential or 
Sensitive Information 



Requirements: Reporting Confidential or Sensitive Information 

6.63 If certain information is prohibited from public disclosure or is 
excluded from a report because of its confidential or sensitive nature, 
auditors should disclose in the report that certain information has been 
omitted and the circumstances that make the omission necessary. 

6.64 When circumstances call for omission of certain information from 
the report, auditors should evaluate whether this omission could distort 
the audit results or conceal improper or illegal practices and revise the 
report language as necessary to avoid report users drawing 
inappropriate conclusions from the information presented. 

6.65 When the audit organization is subject to public records laws, 
auditors should determine whether public records laws could affect the 
availability of classified or limited use reports and determine whether 
other means of communicating with management and those charged 
with governance would be more appropriate. Auditors use professional 
judgment to determine the appropriate means to communicate the 
omitted information to management and those charged with 
governance considering, among other things, whether public records 
laws could affect the availability of classified or limited use reports. 



 

Application Guidance: Reporting Confidential or Sensitive 
Information 

6.66 If the report refers to the omitted information, the reference may be 
general and not specific. If the omitted information is not necessary to 
meet the audit objectives, the report need not refer to its omission. 

6.67 Certain information may be classified or may otherwise be prohibited 
from general disclosure by federal, state, or local laws or regulations. In 
such circumstances, auditors may issue a separate, classified, or limited 
use report containing such information and distribute the report only to 
persons authorized by law or regulation to receive it. 

6.68 Additional circumstances associated with public safety, privacy, or 
security concerns could also justify the exclusion of certain information 
from a publicly available or widely distributed report. For example, 
detailed information related to computer security for a particular program 
may be excluded from publicly available reports because of the potential 
damage that misuse of this information could cause. In such 


circumstances, auditors may issue a limited use report containing such 
information and distribute the report only to those parties responsible for 
acting on the auditors’ recommendations. In some instances, it may be 
appropriate to issue both a publicly available report with the sensitive 
information excluded and a limited use report. The auditors may consult 
with legal counsel regarding any requirements or other circumstances 
that may necessitate omitting certain information. Considering the broad 
public interest in the program or activity under audit assists auditors when 
deciding whether to exclude certain information from publicly available 
reports. 

6.69 In cases described in paragraph 6.65, the auditors may 
communicate general information in a written report and communicate 
detailed information orally. The auditors may consult with legal counsel 
regarding applicable public records laws. 

 

Distributing Reports 




Requirement: Distributing Reports 

6.70 Distribution of reports completed in accordance with GAGAS 
depends on the auditors’ relationship with the audited entity and the 
nature of the information contained in the reports. Auditors should 
document any limitation on report distribution. 

a. An audit organization in a government entity should distribute 
audit reports to those charged with governance, to the 
appropriate audited entity officials, and to the appropriate 
oversight bodies or organizations requiring or arranging for the 
audits. As appropriate, auditors should also distribute copies of 
the reports to other officials who have legal oversight authority 
or who may be responsible for acting on audit findings and 
recommendations and to others authorized to receive such 
reports. 
b. A public accounting firm contracted to conduct an audit in 
accordance with GAGAS should clarify report distribution 
responsibilities with the engaging party. If the contracting firm is 
responsible for the distribution, it should reach agreement with 
the party contracting for the audit about which officials or 
organizations will receive the report and the steps being taken 
to make the report available to the public. 



















Chapter 7: Standards for Attestation 
Engagements and Reviews of Financial 
Statements 



7.01 This chapter contains requirements and guidance for conducting and 
reporting on attestation engagements and reviews of financial statements 
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing 
standards (GAGAS). For attestation engagements, GAGAS incorporates 
by reference the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ 
(AICPA) Statements on Standards for Attestation Engagements (SSAE). 
For reviews of financial statements, GAGAS incorporates by reference 
AICPA’s AR-C section 90, Review of Financial Statements.49 All sections 
of the cited standards are incorporated, including the introduction, 
objectives, definitions, requirements, and application and other 
explanatory material. GAGAS does not incorporate the AICPA Code of 
Professional Conduct by reference but recognizes that certain certified 
public accountants (CPA) may use or may be required to use the code in 
conjunction with GAGAS.50 For attestation engagements and reviews of 
financial statements conducted in accordance with GAGAS, the 
requirements and guidance in the respective incorporated standards and 
this chapter apply. The requirements and guidance contained in chapters 
1 through 5 also apply. 

49AICPA, Professional Standards. 

50See para. 2.14 for a discussion of the AICPA Code of Professional Conduct. 

51See para. .08 of AT-C section 205, para. .09 of AT-C section 210, and para. .14 of AT-C 
section 215; and para. .11 of AR-C section 90 (AICPA, Professional Standards). 

7.02 An attestation engagement can provide one of three levels of service 
as defined by the AICPA: an examination engagement, a review 
engagement, or an agreed-upon procedures engagement. 

7.03 The AICPA standards used in conjunction with GAGAS require 
auditors to establish an understanding with the audited entity regarding 
the services to be performed for each attestation engagement or review 
of financial statements. Such an understanding reduces the risk that 
either the auditors or the audited entity may misinterpret the needs or 
expectations of the other party. The understanding includes the objectives 
of the engagement, responsibilities of audited entity management, 
responsibilities of auditors, and limitations of the engagement.51 

7.04 Auditors often conduct GAGAS engagements under a contract with 
a party other than the officials of the audited entity or pursuant to a third-
party request. In such cases, auditors may also find it appropriate to 
communicate information regarding the services to be performed to the 


individuals contracting for or requesting the engagement. Such an 
understanding can help auditors avoid any misunderstandings regarding 
the nature of the review or agreed-upon procedures engagement. For 
example, a review engagement only provides limited assurance, and as a 
result, auditors do not perform sufficient work to be able to develop 
elements of a finding or provide recommendations that are common in 
other types of GAGAS engagements. An agreed-upon procedures 
engagement does not provide an opinion or conclusion, and as a result, 
auditors do not perform sufficient work to be able to develop elements of 
a finding or provide recommendations that are common in other types of 
GAGAS engagements. Consequently, requesting parties may find that a 
different type of attestation engagement or a performance audit may 
provide the appropriate level of assurance to meet their needs. 

 

Examination 
Engagements 




 

 

 


Compliance with 
Standards 



Requirement: Compliance with Standards 

7.05 GAGAS establishes requirements for examination engagements 
in addition to the requirements for examinations contained in the 
AICPA’s SSAEs. Auditors should comply with these additional 
requirements, along with the AICPA requirements for examination 
engagements, when citing GAGAS in their examination engagement 
reports. 



 

Application Guidance: Compliance with Standards 

7.06 The AICPA standards applicable to examinations require the 
auditors to apply the concept of materiality appropriately in planning and 
performing the examination. Additional considerations may apply to 
GAGAS engagements that concern government entities or entities that 
receive government awards. For example, for engagements conducted in 
accordance with GAGAS, auditors may find it appropriate to use lower 
materiality levels than those used in non-GAGAS engagements because 
of the public accountability of government entities and entities receiving 
government funding, various legal and regulatory requirements, and the 
visibility and sensitivity of government programs. 


 

Licensing and Certification 



Requirements: Licensing and Certification 

7.07 Auditors engaged to conduct examination engagements in the 
United States who do not work for a government audit organization 
should be licensed CPAs, persons working for licensed certified public 
accounting firms, or licensed accountants in states that have multiclass 
licensing systems that recognize licensed accountants other than 
CPAs. 

7.08 Auditors engaged to conduct examination engagements of 
entities operating outside of the United States who do not work for a 
government audit organization should meet the qualifications indicated 
in paragraph 7.07, have certifications that meet all applicable national 
and international standards and serve in their respective countries as 
the functional equivalent of CPAs in the United States, or work for 
nongovernment audit organizations that are the functional equivalent 
of licensed certified public accounting firms in the United States. 



 

 

Auditor Communication 




Requirements: Auditor Communication 

7.09 If the law or regulation requiring an examination engagement 
specifically identifies the entities to be examined, auditors should 
communicate pertinent information that in the auditors’ professional 
judgment needs to be communicated both to individuals contracting for 
or requesting the examination and to those legislative committees, if 
any, that have ongoing oversight responsibilities for the audited entity. 

7.10 If the identity of those charged with governance is not clearly 
evident, auditors should document the process followed and 
conclusions reached in identifying the appropriate individuals to 
receive the required communications. 



 

Application Guidance: Auditor Communication 

7.11 For some matters, early communication to those charged with 
governance or management may be important because of the relative 
significance and the urgency for corrective follow-up action. Further, early 
communication is important to allow management to take prompt 


corrective action to prevent further occurrences when a control deficiency 
results in identified or suspected noncompliance with provisions of laws, 
regulations, contracts, and grant agreements or identified or suspected 
fraud. When a deficiency is communicated early, the reporting 
requirements and application guidance in paragraphs 7.39 through 7.47 
still apply. 

7.12 Because the governance structures of government entities and 
organizations can vary widely, it may not always be clearly evident who is 
charged with key governance functions. The process for identifying those 
charged with governance includes evaluating the organizational structure 
for directing and controlling operations to achieve the audited entity’s 
objectives and how the audited entity delegates authority and establishes 
accountability for management. 

 

Results of Previous 
Engagements 




Requirement: Results of Previous Engagements 

7.13 When planning a GAGAS examination engagement, auditors 
should ask management of the audited entity to identify previous 
audits, attestation engagements, and other studies that directly relate 
to the subject matter or an assertion about the subject matter of the 
examination engagement, including whether related recommendations 
have been implemented. Auditors should evaluate whether the audited 
entity has taken appropriate corrective action to address findings and 
recommendations from previous engagements that could have a 
significant effect on the subject matter or an assertion about the 
subject matter. Auditors should use this information in assessing risk 
and determining the nature, timing, and extent of current work and 
determining the extent to which testing the implementation of the 
corrective actions is applicable to the current examination engagement 
objectives. 



 

 

Investigations or Legal 
Proceedings 




Requirement: Investigations or Legal Proceedings 

7.14 Auditors should inquire of management of the audited entity 
whether any investigations or legal proceedings significant to the 
engagement objectives have been initiated or are in process with 




respect to the period under examination, and should evaluate the 
effect of initiated or in-process investigations or legal proceedings on 
the current examination engagement. 



 

Application Guidance: Investigations or Legal Proceedings 

7.15 Laws, regulations, or policies may require auditors to report 
indications of certain types of fraud or noncompliance with provisions of 
laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements to law enforcement or 
investigatory authorities before performing additional examination 
procedures. 

7.16 Avoiding interference with investigations or legal proceedings is 
important in pursuing indications of fraud and noncompliance with 
provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements. In some 
cases, it may be appropriate for the auditors to work with investigators or 
legal authorities or to withdraw from or defer further work on the 
attestation engagement or a portion of the engagement to avoid 
interfering with an ongoing investigation or legal proceeding. 

 

Noncompliance with 
Provisions of Laws, 
Regulations, Contracts, 
and Grant Agreements 




Requirement: Noncompliance with Provisions of Laws, 
Regulations, Contracts, and Grant Agreements 

7.17 Auditors should extend the AICPA requirements concerning 
consideration of noncompliance with laws and regulations to include 
consideration of noncompliance with provisions of contracts and grant 
agreements.52 



52See paras. .32 and .33 of AT-C section 205 (AICPA, Professional Standards). 

 

Application Guidance: Noncompliance with Provisions of Laws, 
Regulations, Contracts, and Grant Agreements 

7.18 Government programs are subject to provisions of many laws, 
regulations, contracts, and grant agreements. At the same time, these 
provisions’ significance within the context of the engagement objectives 
varies widely, depending on the objectives of the engagement. Auditors 
may consult with their legal counsel to (1) determine those laws and 


regulations that are significant to the examination objectives, (2) design 
tests of compliance with laws and regulations, and (3) evaluate the results 
of those tests. Auditors also may consult with their legal counsel when 
engagement objectives require testing compliance with provisions of 
contracts or grant agreements. Depending on the circumstances of the 
engagement, auditors may consult with others—such as investigative 
staff, other audit organizations or government entities that provided 
professional services to the audited entity, or applicable law enforcement 
authorities—to obtain information on compliance matters. 

 

Findings 




Requirements: Findings 

7.19 When auditors identify findings, they should plan and perform 
procedures to develop the criteria, condition, cause, and effect of the 
findings to the extent that these elements are relevant and necessary 
to achieve the examination objectives. 

7.20 Auditors should consider internal control deficiencies in their 
evaluation of identified findings when developing the cause element of 
the identified findings. 



 

Application Guidance: Findings 

7.21 Findings may involve deficiencies in internal control; noncompliance 
with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements; or 
instances of fraud. 

7.22 Given the concept of accountability for use of public resources and 
government authority, evaluating internal control in a government 
environment may also include considering internal control deficiencies 
that result in waste or abuse. Because the determination of waste and 
abuse is subjective, auditors are not required to perform specific 
procedures to detect waste or abuse in examinations. However, auditors 
may consider whether and how to communicate such matters if they 
become aware of them. Auditors may also discover that waste or abuse 
are indicative of fraud or noncompliance with provisions of laws, 
regulations, contracts, and grant agreements. 

7.23 Waste is the act of using or expending resources carelessly, 
extravagantly, or to no purpose. Importantly, waste can include activities 
that do not include abuse and does not necessarily involve a violation of 


law. Rather, waste relates primarily to mismanagement, inappropriate 
actions, and inadequate oversight. 

7.24 The following are examples of waste, depending on the facts and 
circumstances: 

a. Making travel choices that are contrary to existing travel policies 
or are unnecessarily extravagant or expensive. 
b. Making procurement or vendor selections that are contrary to 
existing policies or are unnecessarily extravagant or expensive. 


7.25 Abuse is behavior that is deficient or improper when compared with 
behavior that a prudent person would consider reasonable and necessary 
business practice given the facts and circumstances, but excludes fraud 
and noncompliance with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and 
grant agreements. Abuse also includes misuse of authority or position for 
personal financial interests or those of an immediate or close family 
member or business associate. 

7.26 The following are examples of abuse, depending on the facts and 
circumstances: 

a. Creating unneeded overtime. 
b. Requesting staff to perform personal errands or work tasks for a 
supervisor or manager. 
c. Misusing the official’s position for personal gain (including actions 
that could be perceived by an objective third party with knowledge 
of the relevant information as improperly benefiting an official’s 
personal financial interests or those of an immediate or close 
family member; a general partner; an organization for which the 
official serves as an officer, director, trustee, or employee; or an 
organization with which the official is negotiating concerning future 
employment). 


7.27 Criteria: For inclusion in findings, criteria may include the laws, 
regulations, contracts, grant agreements, standards, measures, expected 
performance, defined business practices, and benchmarks against which 
performance is compared or evaluated. Criteria identify the required or 
desired state or expectation with respect to the program or operation. 


Criteria provide a context for evaluating evidence and understanding the 
findings, conclusions, and recommendations in the report. 

7.28 Condition: Condition is a situation that exists. The condition is 
determined and documented during the attestation engagement. 

7.29 Cause: The cause is the factor or factors responsible for the 
difference between the condition and the criteria, and may also serve as a 
basis for recommendations for corrective actions. Common factors 
include poorly designed policies, procedures, or criteria; inconsistent, 
incomplete, or incorrect implementation; or factors beyond the control of 
program management. Auditors may assess whether the evidence 
provides a reasonable and convincing argument for why the stated cause 
is the key factor contributing to the difference between the condition and 
the criteria. 

7.30 Effect or potential effect: The effect or potential effect is the outcome 
or consequence resulting from the difference between the condition and 
the criteria. When the engagement objectives include identifying the 
actual or potential consequences of a condition that varies (either 
positively or negatively) from the criteria identified in the engagement, 
effect is a measure of those consequences. Effect or potential effect may 
be used to demonstrate the need for corrective action in response to 
identified problems or relevant risks. 

7.31 Regardless of the type of finding identified, the cause of a finding 
may relate to an underlying internal control deficiency. Depending on the 
magnitude of impact, likelihood of occurrence, and nature of the 
deficiency, this deficiency could be a significant deficiency or a material 
weakness. 

7.32 Considering internal control in the context of a comprehensive 
internal control framework, such as Standards for Internal Control in the 
Federal Government or Internal Control—Integrated Framework,53 can 

53The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission’s Internal 
Control—Integrated Framework and Standards for Internal Control in the Federal 
Government (GAO-14-704G) provide suitable and available criteria against which 
management may evaluate and report on the effectiveness of the entity’s internal control. 
Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government may be adopted by entities 
beyond those federal entities for which it is legally required, such as state, local, and 
quasi-governmental entities, as well as other federal entities and not-for-profit 
organizations, as a framework for an internal control system. 


help auditors to determine whether underlying internal control deficiencies 
exist as the root cause of findings. Identifying these deficiencies can help 
provide the basis for developing meaningful recommendations for 
corrective actions. 


Examination Engagement 
Documentation 




Requirements: Examination Engagement Documentation 

7.33 Auditors should comply with the following documentation 
requirements. 

a. Before the date of the examination report, document 
supervisory review of the evidence that supports the findings, 
conclusions, and recommendations contained in the 
examination report. 
b. Document any departures from the GAGAS requirements and 
the effect on the examination engagement and on the auditors’ 
conclusions when the examination engagement does not 
comply with applicable GAGAS requirements because of law, 
regulation, scope limitations, restrictions on access to records, 
or other issues affecting the examination engagement. 










7.34 In addition to the requirements of the examination engagement 
standards used in conjunction with GAGAS, auditors should prepare 
attest documentation in sufficient detail to enable an experienced 
auditor, having no previous connection to the examination 
engagement, to understand from the documentation the nature, timing, 
extent, and results of procedures performed and the evidence obtained 
and its source and the conclusions reached, including evidence that 
supports the auditors’ significant judgments and conclusions. 



 

Application Guidance: Examination Engagement Documentation 

7.35 When documenting departures from the GAGAS requirements 
where alternative procedures performed were not sufficient to achieve the 
objectives of the requirements, the examination engagement 
documentation requirements apply to departures from unconditional 
requirements and presumptively mandatory requirements. 

7.36 An experienced auditor is an individual who possesses the 
competencies and skills to be able to conduct the examination 


engagement. These competencies and skills include an understanding of 
(1) examination engagement processes and related examination 
standards, (2) GAGAS and applicable legal and regulatory requirements, 
(3) the subject matter on which the auditors are engaged to report, (4) the 
suitability and availability of criteria, and (5) issues related to the audited 
entity’s environment. 

 

Availability of Individuals 
and Documentation 




Requirement: Availability of Individuals and Documentation 

7.37 Subject to applicable provisions of laws and regulations, auditors 
should make appropriate individuals and examination engagement 
documentation available upon request and in a timely manner to other 
auditors or reviewers. 



 

Application Guidance: Availability of Individuals and Documentation 

7.38 Underlying GAGAS examination engagements is the premise that 
audit organizations in federal, state, and local governments and public 
accounting firms engaged to conduct examination engagements in 
accordance with GAGAS cooperate in evaluating programs of common 
interest so that auditors may use others’ work and avoid duplication of 
efforts. The use of auditors’ work by other auditors may be facilitated by 
contractual arrangements for GAGAS engagements that provide for full 
and timely access to appropriate individuals and to engagement 
documentation. 

 

Reporting the Auditors’ 
Compliance with GAGAS 




Requirements: Reporting the Auditors’ Compliance with GAGAS 

7.39 When auditors comply with all applicable GAGAS requirements, 
they should include a statement in the report that they conducted the 
examination in accordance with GAGAS.54 

7.40 If auditors report separately (including separate reports bound in 
the same document) on deficiencies in internal control; noncompliance 
with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements; 



54See paras. 2.16 through 2.19 for information on the GAGAS compliance statement. 


or instances of fraud, they should state in the examination report that 
they are issuing those additional reports. They should include a 
reference to the separate reports and also state that the reports are an 
integral part of a GAGAS examination engagement. 



 

Application Guidance: Reporting the Auditors’ Compliance with 
GAGAS 

7.41 Because GAGAS incorporates by reference the AICPA’s attestation 
standards, GAGAS does not require auditors to cite compliance with the 
AICPA standards when citing compliance with GAGAS. GAGAS does not 
prohibit auditors from issuing a separate report conforming only to the 
requirements of the AICPA or other standards. 

 

Reporting Deficiencies in 
Internal Control 




Requirement: Reporting Deficiencies in Internal Control 

7.42 Auditors should include in the examination report all internal 
control deficiencies, even those communicated early, that are 
considered to be significant deficiencies or material weaknesses that 
the auditors identified based on the engagement work performed.55 



55GAGAS’s use of internal control terminology is consistent with the definitions contained 
in AU-C section 265 (AICPA, Professional Standards). 

 

Application Guidance: Reporting Deficiencies in Internal Control 

7.43 Determining whether and how to communicate to officials of the 
audited entity internal control deficiencies that are not considered 
significant deficiencies or material weaknesses is a matter of professional 
judgment. 

 


Reporting on 
Noncompliance with 
Provisions of Laws, 
Regulations, Contracts, 
and Grant Agreements or 
Instances of Fraud 




Requirements: Reporting on Noncompliance with Provisions of 
Laws, Regulations, Contracts, and Grant Agreements or 
Instances of Fraud 

7.44 Auditors should include in their examination report the relevant 
information about noncompliance and fraud when auditors, based on 
sufficient, appropriate evidence, identify or suspect 

a. noncompliance with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, 
or grant agreements that has a material effect on the subject 
matter or an assertion about the subject matter or 
b. fraud that is material, either quantitatively or qualitatively, to the 
subject matter or an assertion about the subject matter that is 
significant to the engagement objectives. 
















7.45 When auditors identify or suspect noncompliance with provisions 
of laws, regulations, contracts, or grant agreements or instances of 
fraud that have an effect on the subject matter or an assertion about 
the subject matter that are less than material but warrant the attention 
of those charged with governance, they should communicate in writing 
to audited entity officials. 



 

Application Guidance: Reporting on Noncompliance with Provisions 
of Laws, Regulations, Contracts, or Grant Agreements or Instances 
of Fraud 

7.46 When auditors identify or suspect noncompliance with provisions of 
laws, regulations, contracts, or grant agreements or instances of fraud 
that do not warrant the attention of those charged with governance, the 
auditors’ determination of whether and how to communicate such 
instances to audited entity officials is a matter of professional judgment. 

7.47 When auditors identify or suspect noncompliance with provisions of 
laws, regulations, contracts, or grant agreements or instances of fraud, 
auditors may consult with authorities or legal counsel about whether 
publicly reporting such information would compromise investigative or 
legal proceedings. Auditors may limit their public reporting to matters that 
would not compromise those proceedings and, for example, report only 
on information that is already a part of the public record. 

 


Presenting Findings in the 
Report 




Requirements: Presenting Findings in the Report 

7.48 When presenting findings, auditors should develop the elements 
of the findings to the extent necessary to assist management or 
oversight officials of the audited entity in understanding the need for 
taking corrective action. 

7.49 Auditors should place their findings in perspective by describing 
the nature and extent of the issues being reported and the extent of 
the work performed that resulted in the findings. To give the reader a 
basis for judging the prevalence and consequences of the findings, 
auditors should, as appropriate, relate the instances identified to the 
population or the number of cases examined and quantify the results in 
terms of dollar value or other measures. If the results cannot be 
projected, auditors should limit their conclusions appropriately. 



 

Application Guidance: Presenting Findings in the Report 

7.50 Along with assisting management or oversight officials of the audited 
entity in understanding the need for taking corrective action, clearly 
developed findings assist auditors in making recommendations for 
corrective action. If auditors sufficiently develop the elements of a finding, 
they may provide recommendations for corrective action. 

 

Reporting Findings 
Directly to Parties outside 
the Audited Entity 




Requirements: Reporting Findings Directly to Parties outside the 
Audited Entity 

7.51 Auditors should report identified or suspected noncompliance with 
provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements and 
instances of fraud directly to parties outside the audited entity in the 
following two circumstances. 

a. When audited entity management fails to satisfy legal or 
regulatory requirements to report such information to external 
parties specified in law or regulation, auditors should first 
communicate the failure to report such information to those 
charged with governance. If the audited entity still does not 
report this information to the specified external parties as soon 
as practicable after the auditors’ communication with those 



















charged with governance, then the auditors should report the 
information directly to the specified external parties. 
b. When audited entity management fails to take timely and 
appropriate steps to respond to fraud or noncompliance with 
provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant 
agreements that (1) is likely to have a material effect on the 
subject matter and (2) involves funding received directly or 
indirectly from a government agency, auditors should first 
report management’s failure to take timely and appropriate 
steps to those charged with governance. If the audited entity 
still does not take timely and appropriate steps as soon as 
practicable after the auditors’ communication with those 
charged with governance, then the auditors should report the 
audited entity’s failure to take timely and appropriate steps 
directly to the funding agency. 
















7.52 Auditors should comply with the requirements in paragraph 7.51 
even if they have resigned or been dismissed from the engagement 
prior to its completion. 

7.53 Auditors should obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence, such as 
confirmation from outside parties, to corroborate representations by 
management of the audited entity that it has reported engagement 
findings in accordance with laws, regulations, or funding agreements. 
When auditors are unable to do so, they should report such 
information directly, as discussed in paragraphs 7.51 and 7.52. 



 

Application Guidance: Reporting Findings Directly to Parties outside 
the Audited Entity 

7.54 The reporting in paragraph 7.51 is in addition to any legal 
requirements to report such information directly to parties outside the 
audited entity. 

 

Obtaining and Reporting 
the Views of Responsible 
Officials 




Requirements: Obtaining and Reporting the Views of Responsible 
Officials 

7.55 Auditors should obtain and report the views of responsible 




officials of the audited entity concerning the findings, conclusions, and 
recommendations in the examination report, as well as any planned 
corrective actions. 

7.56 When auditors receive written comments from the responsible 
officials, they should include in their report a copy of the officials’ 
written comments or a summary of the comments received. When the 
responsible officials provide oral comments only, auditors should 
prepare a summary of the oral comments, provide a copy of the 
summary to the responsible officials to verify that the comments are 
accurately represented, and include the summary in their report. 

7.57 When the audited entity’s comments are inconsistent or in conflict 
with the findings, conclusions, or recommendations in the draft report, 
the auditors should evaluate the validity of the audited entity’s 
comments. If the auditors disagree with the comments, they should 
explain in the report their reasons for disagreement. Conversely, the 
auditors should modify their report as necessary if they find the 
comments valid and supported by sufficient, appropriate evidence. 

7.58 If the audited entity refuses to provide comments or is unable to 
provide comments within a reasonable period of time, the auditors 
should issue the report without receiving comments from the audited 
entity. In such cases, the auditors should indicate in the report that the 
audited entity did not provide comments. 



 

Application Guidance: Obtaining and Reporting the Views of 
Responsible Officials 

7.59 Providing a draft report with findings for review and comment by 
responsible officials of the audited entity and others helps the auditors 
develop a report that is fair, complete, and objective. Including the views 
of responsible officials results in a report that presents not only the 
auditors’ findings, conclusions, and recommendations but also the 
perspectives of the audited entity’s responsible officials and the corrective 
actions they plan to take. Obtaining the comments in writing is preferred, 
but oral comments are acceptable. When the audited entity provides 
technical comments in addition to its written or oral comments on the 
report, auditors may disclose in the report that such comments were 
received. Technical comments address points of fact or are editorial in 
nature and do not address substantive issues, such as methodology, 
findings, conclusions, or recommendations. 


7.60 Obtaining oral comments may be appropriate when, for example, 
there is a reporting date critical to meeting a user’s needs; auditors have 
worked closely with the responsible officials throughout the engagement, 
and the parties are familiar with the findings and issues addressed in the 
draft report; or the auditors do not expect major disagreements with 
findings, conclusions, or recommendations in the draft report or major 
controversies with regard to the issues discussed in the draft report. 

 

Reporting Confidential or 
Sensitive Information 




Requirements: Reporting Confidential or Sensitive Information 

7.61 If certain information is prohibited from public disclosure or is 
excluded from a report because of its confidential or sensitive nature, 
auditors should disclose in the report that certain information has been 
omitted and the circumstances that make the omission necessary. 

7.62 When circumstances call for omission of certain information, 
auditors should evaluate whether the omission could distort the 
examination engagement results or conceal improper or illegal 
practices and revise the report language as necessary to avoid report 
users drawing inappropriate conclusions from the information 
presented. 

7.63 When the audit organization is subject to public records laws, 
auditors should determine whether public records laws could affect the 
availability of classified or limited use reports and determine whether 
other means of communicating with management and those charged 
with governance would be more appropriate. Auditors use professional 
judgment to determine the appropriate means to communicate the 
omitted information to management and those charged with 
governance considering, among other things, whether public records 
laws could affect the availability of classified or limited use reports. 



 

Application Guidance: Reporting Confidential or Sensitive 
Information 

7.64 If the report refers to the omitted information, the reference may be 
general and not specific. If the omitted information is not necessary to 
meet the engagement objectives, the report need not refer to its omission. 

7.65 Certain information may be classified or may otherwise be prohibited 
from general disclosure by federal, state, or local laws or regulations. In 


such circumstances, auditors may issue a separate, classified, or limited 
use report containing such information and distribute the report only to 
persons authorized by law or regulation to receive it. 

7.66 Additional circumstances associated with public safety, privacy, or 
security concerns could also justify the exclusion of certain information 
from a publicly available or widely distributed report. For example, 
detailed information related to computer security for a particular program 
may be excluded from publicly available reports because of the potential 
damage that misuse of this information could cause. In such 
circumstances, auditors may issue a limited use report containing such 
information and distribute the report only to those parties responsible for 
acting on the auditors’ recommendations. In some instances, it may be 
appropriate to issue both a publicly available report with the sensitive 
information excluded and a limited use report. The auditors may consult 
with legal counsel regarding any requirements or other circumstances 
that may necessitate omitting certain information. 

7.67 Considering the broad public interest in the program or activity under 
examination assists auditors when deciding whether to exclude certain 
information from publicly available reports. 

7.68 In cases described in paragraph 7.63, the auditors may 
communicate general information in a written report and communicate 
detailed information orally. The auditors may consult with legal counsel 
regarding applicable public records laws. 

 

Distributing Reports 




Requirement: Distributing Reports 

7.69 Distribution of reports completed in accordance with GAGAS 
depends on the auditors’ relationship with the audited organization and 
the nature of the information contained in the reports. Auditors should 
document any limitation on report distribution. 

a. An audit organization in a government entity should distribute 
reports to those charged with governance, to the appropriate 
audited entity officials, and to the appropriate oversight bodies 
or organizations requiring or arranging for the examination 
engagements. As appropriate, auditors should also distribute 
copies of the reports to other officials who have legal oversight 



















authority or who may be responsible for acting on engagement 
findings and recommendations and to others authorized to 
receive such reports. 
b. A public accounting firm contracted to conduct an examination 
engagement in accordance with GAGAS should clarify report 
distribution responsibilities with the engaging party. If the 
contracting firm is responsible for the distribution, it should 
reach agreement with the party contracting for the examination 
engagement about which officials or organizations will receive 
the report and the steps being taken to make the report 
available to the public. 


















 

 

Review Engagements 




 

 


Compliance with 
Standards 



Requirement: Compliance with Standards 

7.70 GAGAS establishes requirements for review engagements in 
addition to the requirements for reviews contained in the AICPA’s 
SSAEs. Auditors should comply with the additional GAGAS 
requirements, along with the applicable AICPA requirements, when 
citing GAGAS in their review engagement reports. 



 

 

Licensing and Certification 




Requirements: Licensing and Certification 

7.71 Auditors engaged to conduct review engagements in the United 
States who do not work for a government audit organization should be 
licensed CPAs, persons working for licensed certified public 
accounting firms, or licensed accountants in states that have multiclass 
licensing systems that recognize licensed accountants other than 
CPAs. 

7.72 Auditors engaged to conduct review engagements of entities 
operating outside of the United States who do not work for a 




government audit organization should meet the qualifications indicated 
in paragraph 7.71, have certifications that meet all applicable national 
and international standards and serve in their respective countries as 
the functional equivalent of CPAs in the United States, or work for 
nongovernment audit organizations that are the functional equivalent 
of licensed certified public accounting firms in the United States. 



 

 

Noncompliance with 
Provisions of Laws, 
Regulations, Contracts, 
and Grant Agreements 




Requirement: Noncompliance with Provisions of Laws, 
Regulations, Contracts, and Grant Agreements 

7.73 Auditors should extend the AICPA requirements concerning 
consideration of noncompliance with laws and regulations to include 
consideration of noncompliance with provisions of contracts and grant 
agreements.56 



56See paras. .23 and .24 of AT-C section 210 (AICPA, Professional Standards). 

57See paras. 2.16 through 2.19 for information on the GAGAS compliance statement. 

 

 

Reporting Auditors’ 
Compliance with GAGAS 




Requirement: Reporting Auditors’ Compliance with GAGAS 

7.74 When auditors comply with all applicable requirements for a 
review engagement conducted in accordance with GAGAS, they 
should include a statement in the review report that they conducted the 
engagement in accordance with GAGAS.57 



 

Application Guidance: Reporting Auditors’ Compliance with GAGAS 

7.75 Because GAGAS incorporates by reference the AICPA’s attestation 
standards, GAGAS does not require auditors to cite compliance with the 
AICPA standards when they cite compliance with GAGAS. GAGAS does 
not prohibit auditors from issuing a separate report conforming only to the 
requirements of the AICPA or other standards setters. 


7.76 Because review engagements are substantially less in scope than 
audits and examination engagements, it is important to include all 
required reporting elements contained in the standards used in 
conjunction with GAGAS. For example, a required element of the review 
report under SSAEs is a statement that a review is substantially less in 
scope than an examination, the objective of which is to express an 
opinion on the subject matter, and accordingly, no such opinion is 
expressed.58 Including only those elements that the reporting standards 
for review engagements require or permit helps ensure that auditors 
comply with the standards and that users of GAGAS reports have an 
understanding of the nature of the work performed and the results of the 
review engagement. 

58See para. .46(f)(iii) of AT-C section 210 (AICPA, Professional Standards). 

 

Distributing Reports 




Requirement: Distributing Reports 

7.77 Distribution of reports completed in accordance with GAGAS 
depends on the auditors’ relationship with the audited organization and 
the nature of the information contained in the reports. If the subject 
matter or the assertion involves material that is classified or contains 
confidential or sensitive information, auditors should limit report 
distribution. Auditors should document any limitation on report 
distribution. 

a. An audit organization in a government entity should distribute 
reports to those charged with governance, to the appropriate 
audited entity officials, and to the appropriate oversight bodies 
or organizations requiring or arranging for the engagements. As 
appropriate, auditors should also distribute copies of the 
reports to other officials who have legal oversight authority and 
to others authorized to receive such reports. 
b. A public accounting firm contracted to conduct a review 
engagement in accordance with GAGAS should clarify report 
distribution responsibilities with the engaging party. If the 
contracting firm is responsible for the distribution, it should 
reach agreement with the party contracting for the engagement 





about which officials or organizations will receive the report and 
the steps being taken to make the report available to the public. 




 

 


Agreed-Upon 
Procedures 
Engagements 



 

 

 

 


Compliance with 
Standards 



Requirement: Compliance with Standards 

7.78 GAGAS establishes requirements for agreed-upon procedures 
engagements in addition to the requirements for agreed-upon 
procedures engagements contained in the AICPA’s SSAEs. Auditors 
should comply with the additional GAGAS requirements, along with the 
applicable AICPA requirements, when citing GAGAS in their agreed-
upon procedures engagement reports. 



 

 

Licensing and Certification 




Requirements: Licensing and Certification 

7.79 Auditors engaged to conduct agreed-upon procedures 
engagements in the United States who do not work for a government 
audit organization should be licensed CPAs, persons working for 
licensed certified public accounting firms, or licensed accountants in 
states that have multiclass licensing systems that recognize licensed 
accountants other than CPAs. 

7.80 Auditors engaged to conduct agreed-upon procedures 
engagements of entities operating outside of the United States who do 
not work for a government audit organization should meet the 
qualifications indicated in paragraph 7.79, have certifications that meet 
all applicable national and international standards and serve in their 
respective countries as the functional equivalent of CPAs in the United 
States, or work for nongovernment audit organizations that are the 

 




functional equivalent of licensed certified public accounting firms in the 
United States. 



 

 

Noncompliance with 
Provisions of Laws, 
Regulations, Contracts, 
and Grant Agreements 




Requirement: Noncompliance with Provisions of Laws, 
Regulations, Contracts, and Grant Agreements 

7.81 Auditors should extend the AICPA requirements concerning 
consideration of noncompliance with laws and regulations to include 
consideration of noncompliance with provisions of contracts and grant 
agreements.59 



59See para. .42 of AT-C section 215 (AICPA, Professional Standards). 

60See paras. 2.16 through 2.19 for information on the GAGAS compliance statement. 

 

 

Reporting Auditors’ 
Compliance with GAGAS 




Requirement: Reporting Auditors’ Compliance with GAGAS 

7.82 When auditors comply with all applicable GAGAS requirements 
for agreed-upon procedures engagements, they should include a 
statement in the agreed-upon procedures engagement report that they 
conducted the engagement in accordance with GAGAS.60 



 

Application Guidance: Reporting Auditors’ Compliance with GAGAS 

7.83 Because GAGAS incorporates by reference the AICPA’s attestation 
standards, GAGAS does not require auditors to cite compliance with the 
AICPA standards when citing compliance with GAGAS. GAGAS does not 
prohibit auditors from issuing a separate report conforming only to the 
requirements of the AICPA or other standards. 

7.84 Because agreed-upon procedures engagements are substantially 
less in scope than audits and examination engagements, it is important 
not to deviate from the required reporting elements contained in the 
attestation standards incorporated by reference in GAGAS, other than 


Chapter 7: StandardsforAttestationEngagements and Reviews of FinancialStatements

Distributing Reports

including the reference to GAGAS. For example, a required element of 
the report on agreed-upon procedures is a statement that the auditorswere not engaged to and did not conduct an examination or a review of 
the subject matter, the objective of which would be the expression of anopinion or a conclusion, respectively, and that had the auditors performed 
additional procedures, other matters may have come to their attention 
that would have been reported.61Another required element isa statement 
that the sufficiency of the procedures is solely the responsibility of the 
parties specified in the report and a disclaimer of responsibility forsufficiency of those procedures.62Including only those elements that the 
AICPA reporting standards for agreed-upon procedures engagementsrequire or permit helps ensure that auditors comply with the AICPAstandards and that users of GAGASreports understand the nature of the 
work performed and the results of the agreed-upon proceduresengagement.

Requirement: Distributing Reports

7.85Distribution of reports completed in accordance with GAGASdepends on the auditors’relationship with the audited organization and 
the nature of the information contained in the reports. If the subject 
matter or the assertion involves material that isclassified orcontainsconfidentialor sensitive information, auditors should limit thereport 
distribution. Auditors should document any limitation on report 
distribution.
a.An audit organization in a government entity should distribute 
reports to those charged with governance, to the appropriate 
audited entity officials, and to the appropriate oversight bodiesororganizations requiring or arranging for the engagements.Asappropriate, auditors should also distribute copies of the 
reports to other officialswho have legal oversight authority and 
to others authorized to receive such reports.
b.Apublic accounting firm contracted to conduct an agreed-upon 
procedures engagement in accordance with GAGAS should 
61See para. .35(j) of AT-C section 215 (AICPA,Professional Standards).
62See para. .35(g) of AT-C section 215 (AICPA,ProfessionalStandards).

Page 149GAO-21-368GGovernment Auditing Standards


clarify report distribution responsibilities with the engaging 
party. If the contracting firm is responsible for the distribution, it 
should reach agreement with the party contracting for the 
engagement about which officials or organizations will receive 
the report and the steps being taken to make the report 
available to the public. 




 

 

 

 


Reviews of Financial 
Statements 



 

 

 


Compliance with 
Standards 



Requirement: Compliance with Standards 

7.86 GAGAS establishes requirements for reviews of financial 
statements in addition to the requirements for reviews of financial 
statements contained in the AICPA’s AR-C section 90, Review of 
Financial Statements.63 Auditors should comply with the additional 
GAGAS requirements, along with the applicable AICPA requirements, 
when citing GAGAS in their review engagement reports. 



63AICPA, Professional Standards. 

 

 

 

Licensing and Certification 




Requirements: Licensing and Certification 

7.87 Auditors engaged to conduct reviews of financial statements in 
the United States who do not work for a government audit organization 
should be licensed CPAs, persons working for licensed certified public 
accounting firms, or licensed accountants in states that have multiclass 
licensing systems that recognize licensed accountants other than 
CPAs. 

7.88 Auditors engaged to conduct reviews of financial statements of 
entities operating outside of the United States who do not work for a 
government audit organization should meet the qualifications indicated 




in paragraph 7.87, have certifications that meet all applicable national 
and international standards and serve in their respective countries as 
the functional equivalent of CPAs in the United States, or work for 
nongovernment audit organizations that are the functional equivalent 
of licensed certified public accounting firms in the United States. 



 

 

Noncompliance with 
Provisions of Laws, 
Regulations, Contracts, 
and Grant Agreements 




Requirement: Noncompliance with Provisions of Laws, 
Regulations, Contracts, and Grant Agreements 

7.89 Auditors should extend the AICPA requirements concerning 
consideration of noncompliance with laws and regulations to include 
consideration of noncompliance with provisions of contracts and grant 
agreements.64 



64See para. .51 of AR-C section 90 (AICPA, Professional Standards). 

65See paras. 2.16 through 2.19 for information on the GAGAS compliance statement. 

66AICPA, Professional Standards. 

 

 

Reporting Auditors’ 
Compliance with GAGAS 




Requirement: Reporting Auditors’ Compliance with GAGAS 

7.90 When auditors comply with all applicable requirements for a 
review of financial statements conducted in accordance with GAGAS, 
they should include a statement in the report that they conducted the 
engagement in accordance with GAGAS.65 



 

Application Guidance: Reporting Auditors’ Compliance with GAGAS 

7.91 Because GAGAS incorporates by reference the AICPA’s AR-C 
section 90, Review of Financial Statements,66 GAGAS does not require 
auditors to cite compliance with the AICPA standards when they cite 
compliance with GAGAS. GAGAS does not prohibit auditors from issuing 
a separate report conforming only to the requirements of the AICPA or 
other standards setters. 


7.92 Because reviews of financial statements are substantially less in 
scope than audits and examination engagements, it is important to 
include all required reporting elements contained in the standards used in 
conjunction with GAGAS. For example, a required reporting element of 
the review of financial statements under AR-C section 90, Review of 
Financial Statements,67 is to include a statement that a review is 
substantially less in scope than an audit, the objective of which is the 
expression of an opinion regarding the financial statements as a whole 
and that accordingly the accountant does not express such an opinion.68 
Including only those elements that the reporting standards for review of 
financial statements engagements require or permit helps ensure that 
auditors comply with the standards and that users of GAGAS reports 
have an understanding of the nature of the work performed and the 
results of the review engagement. 

67AICPA, Professional Standards. 

68See para. .39(c)(vi) of AR-C section 90 (AICPA, Professional Standards). 

 

Distributing Reports 




Requirement: Distributing Reports 

7.93 Distribution of reports completed in accordance with GAGAS 
depends on the auditors’ relationship with the audited organization and 
the nature of the information contained in the reports. If the subject 
matter involves material that is classified or contains confidential or 
sensitive information, auditors should limit report distribution. Auditors 
should document any limitation on report distribution. 

a. An audit organization in a government entity should distribute 
reports to those charged with governance, to the appropriate 
audited entity officials, and to the appropriate oversight bodies 
or organizations requiring or arranging for the engagements. As 
appropriate, auditors should also distribute copies of the 
reports to other officials who have legal oversight authority and 
to others authorized to receive such reports. 
b. A public accounting firm contracted to conduct a review of 
financial statements engagement in accordance with GAGAS 
should clarify report distribution responsibilities with the 
engaging party. If the contracting firm is responsible for the 





distribution, it should reach agreement with the party 
contracting for the engagement about which officials or 
organizations will receive the report and the steps being taken 
to make the report available to the public. 




 


Chapter 8: Fieldwork Standards for 
Performance Audits 



8.01 This chapter contains fieldwork requirements and guidance for 
performance audits conducted in accordance with generally accepted 
government auditing standards (GAGAS). Fieldwork requirements 
establish an overall approach for auditors to apply in planning and 
performing an audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence that 
provides a reasonable basis for findings and conclusions based on the 
audit objectives. For performance audits conducted in accordance with 
GAGAS, the requirements and guidance in chapters 1 through 5 and 
chapter 9 also apply. 

8.02 The fieldwork requirements for performance audits relate to planning 
the audit; conducting the engagement; supervising staff; obtaining 
sufficient, appropriate evidence; and preparing audit documentation. The 
concepts of evidence, significance, and audit risk form a framework for 
applying these requirements and are included throughout the discussion 
of performance audits. 

 


Planning 



Requirements: General 

8.03 Auditors must adequately plan the work necessary to address the 
audit objectives. Auditors must document the audit plan. 

8.04 Auditors must plan the audit to reduce audit risk to an acceptably 
low level. 

8.05 In planning the audit, auditors should assess significance and 
audit risk. Auditors should apply these assessments to establish the 
scope and methodology for addressing the audit objectives. Planning 
is a continuous process throughout the audit. 

8.06 Auditors should design the methodology to obtain sufficient, 
appropriate evidence that provides a reasonable basis for findings and 
conclusions based on the audit objectives and to reduce audit risk to 
an acceptably low level. 

8.07 Auditors should identify and use suitable criteria based on the 
audit objectives. 



 


Application Guidance: General 

8.08 The audit objectives are what the audit is intended to accomplish. 
They identify the audit subject matter and performance aspects to be 
included. Audit objectives can be thought of as questions about the 
program that the auditors seek to answer based on evidence obtained 
and assessed against criteria. Audit objectives may also pertain to the 
current status or condition of a program. The term program as used in 
GAGAS includes processes, projects, studies, policies, operations, 
activities, entities, and functions. 

8.09 Auditors may need to refine or adjust the audit objectives, scope, 
and methodology as work is performed. However, in situations where the 
audit objectives are established by statute or legislative oversight, 
auditors may not have latitude to define or adjust the audit objectives or 
scope. 

8.10 Scope is the boundary of the audit and is directly tied to the audit 
objectives. The scope defines the subject matter that the auditors will 
assess and report on, such as a particular program or aspect of a 
program, the necessary documents or records, the period of time 
reviewed, and the locations that will be included. 

8.11 The methodology describes the nature and extent of audit 
procedures for gathering and analyzing evidence to address the audit 
objectives. Audit procedures are the specific steps and tests auditors 
perform to address the audit objectives. 

8.12 Obtaining sufficient, appropriate evidence provides auditors with a 
reasonable basis for findings and conclusions that are valid, accurate, 
appropriate, and complete with respect to the audit objectives. 

8.13 The sufficiency and appropriateness of evidence needed and tests 
of evidence are determined by the auditors based on the audit objectives, 
findings, and conclusions. Objectives for performance audits range from 
narrow to broad and involve varying types and quality of evidence. In 
some engagements, sufficient, appropriate evidence is available, but in 
others, information may have limitations. Professional judgment assists 
auditors in determining the audit scope and methodology needed to 
address the audit objectives and in evaluating whether sufficient, 
appropriate evidence has been obtained to address the audit objectives. 


8.14 In performance audits conducted in accordance with GAGAS, 
auditors are the party who measures or evaluates the subject matter of 
the engagement and who presents the resulting information as part of, or 
accompanying, the audit report. Therefore, GAGAS does not require 
auditors to obtain management assertions with respect to the subject 
matter when conducting a performance audit. 

8.15 The concept of significance assists auditors throughout a 
performance audit, including when deciding the type and extent of audit 
work to perform, when evaluating results of audit work, and when 
developing the report and related findings and conclusions. Significance 
is defined as the relative importance of a matter within the context in 
which it is being considered, including quantitative and qualitative factors. 
Such factors include the magnitude of the matter in relation to the subject 
matter of the audit, the nature and effect of the matter, the relevance of 
the matter, the needs and interests of an objective third party with 
knowledge of the relevant information, and the matter’s effect on the 
audited program or activity. Professional judgment assists auditors when 
evaluating the significance of matters within the context of the audit 
objectives. In the performance audit requirements, the term significant is 
comparable to the term material as used in the context of financial 
statement engagements. 

8.16 Audit risk is the possibility that the auditors’ findings, conclusions, 
recommendations, or assurance may be improper or incomplete as a 
result of factors such as evidence that is not sufficient or appropriate, an 
inadequate audit process, or intentional omissions or misleading 
information because of misrepresentation or fraud. The assessment of 
audit risk involves both qualitative and quantitative considerations. 
Factors affecting audit risk include the time frames, complexity, or 
sensitivity of the work; size of the program in terms of dollar amounts and 
number of citizens served; adequacy of the audited entity’s systems and 
processes for preventing and detecting inconsistencies, significant errors, 
or fraud; and auditors’ access to records. Audit risk includes the risk that 
auditors will not detect a mistake, inconsistency, significant error, or fraud 
in the evidence supporting the audit. Audit risk can be reduced by taking 
actions such as increasing the scope of work; adding specialists, 
additional reviewers, and other resources to conduct the audit; changing 
the methodology to obtain additional evidence, higher-quality evidence, or 
alternative forms of corroborating evidence; or aligning the findings and 
conclusions to reflect the evidence obtained. 


8.17 Criteria identify the required or desired state or expectation with 
respect to the program or operation. Criteria provide a context for 
evaluating evidence and understanding the findings, conclusions, and 
recommendations in the report. Suitable criteria are relevant, reliable, 
objective, and understandable and do not result in the omission of 
significant information, as applicable, within the context of the audit 
objectives. The relative importance of each of these characteristics to a 
particular engagement is a matter of professional judgment. In instances 
where laws, regulations, or policies prescribe the criteria to be used for 
the engagement, such criteria are presumed to be suitable in the absence 
of indications to the contrary. 

8.18 Examples of criteria include 

a. laws and regulations applicable to the operation of the audited 
entity; 
b. goals, policies, and procedures established by officials of the 
audited entity; 
c. technically developed standards or norms; 
d. expert opinions; 
e. prior periods’ performance; 
f. defined business practices; 
g. contracts or grant agreements; and 
h. benchmarks against which performance is compared, including 
performance of other entities or sectors. 


8.19 For audit objectives that pertain to the current status or condition of a 
program, sufficient, appropriate evidence is gathered to provide 
reasonable assurance that the description of the current status or 
condition of a program is accurate and reliable and does not omit 
significant information relevant to the audit objectives. Information 
addressing the audit objectives is to be provided in an objective, 
understandable manner. The relative importance of each of the 
characteristics of the information to a particular engagement is a matter of 
professional judgment. 

 


Auditor Communication 




Requirements: Auditor Communication 

8.20 Auditors should communicate an overview of the objectives, 
scope, and methodology and the timing of the performance audit and 
planned reporting (including any potential restrictions on the report), 
unless doing so could significantly impair the auditors’ ability to obtain 
sufficient, appropriate evidence to address the audit objectives. 
Auditors should communicate such information with the following 
parties, as applicable: 

a. management of the audited entity, including those with 
sufficient authority and responsibility to implement corrective 
action in the program or activity being audited; 
b. those charged with governance; 
c. the individuals contracting for or requesting audit services, such 
as contracting officials or grantees; or 
d. the cognizant legislative committee, when auditors conduct the 
audit pursuant to a law or regulation or when they conduct the 
work for the legislative committee that has oversight of the 
audited entity. 


8.21 In situations where the parties required to receive 
communications, as described in paragraph 8.20, are not clearly 
evident, auditors should document the process followed and 
conclusions reached in identifying the appropriate individuals to 
receive the required communications. 

8.22 Auditors should retain any written communication resulting from 
paragraph 8.20 as audit documentation. 



 

Application Guidance: Auditor Communication 

8.23 Determining the form, content, and frequency of the communication 
with management or those charged with governance is a matter of 
professional judgment, although written communication is preferred. 
Auditors may use an engagement letter to communicate key information 
early in the engagement. 


8.24 Examples of communications regarding the objectives, scope, 
methodology, and timing that could impair the auditors’ ability to obtain 
sufficient, appropriate evidence include situations in which the auditors 
plan to perform unannounced cash counts or perform procedures related 
to indications of fraud. 

8.25 Communicating with those charged with governance or management 
may include communicating deficiencies in internal control; fraud; or 
noncompliance with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant 
agreements. Early communication of these matters may be important 
because of their relative significance and the urgency for corrective 
follow-up action. Further, early communication is important to allow 
management to take prompt corrective action to prevent further 
occurrences when a control deficiency results in noncompliance with 
provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements or fraud. 
When a deficiency is communicated early, the reporting requirements and 
application guidance in paragraphs 9.29 through 9.44 still apply. 

8.26 Because the governance structures of government entities and 
organizations can vary widely, it may not always be clearly evident who is 
charged with key governance functions. The process for identifying those 
charged with governance includes evaluating the organizational structure 
for directing and controlling operations to achieve the audited entity’s 
objectives and how the audited entity delegates authority and establishes 
accountability for management. 

 

Investigations or Legal 
Proceedings 




Requirement: Investigations or Legal Proceedings 

8.27 Auditors should inquire of management of the audited entity 
whether any investigations or legal proceedings significant to the audit 
objectives have been initiated or are in process with respect to the 
period under audit, and should evaluate the effect of initiated or in-
process investigations or legal proceedings on the current audit. 



 

Application Guidance: Investigations or Legal Proceedings 

8.28 Laws, regulations, or policies may require auditors to report 
indications of the following to law enforcement or investigatory authorities 
before performing additional audit procedures: certain types of fraud or 
noncompliance with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant 
agreements. 


8.29 Avoiding interference with investigations or legal proceedings is 
important in pursuing indications of fraud and noncompliance with 
provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements. In some 
cases, it may be appropriate for the auditors to work with investigators or 
legal authorities or to withdraw from or defer further work on the 
engagement or a portion of the engagement to avoid interfering with an 
ongoing investigation or legal proceeding. 

 

Results of Previous 
Engagements 




Requirement: Results of Previous Engagements 

8.30 Auditors should evaluate whether the audited entity has taken 
appropriate corrective action to address findings and 
recommendations from previous engagements that are significant 
within the context of the audit objectives. When planning the audit, 
auditors should ask management of the audited entity to identify 
previous engagements or other studies that directly relate to the 
objectives of the audit, including whether related recommendations 
have been implemented. Auditors should use this information in 
assessing risk and determining the nature, timing, and extent of 
current audit work, including determining the extent to which testing 
the implementation of the corrective actions is applicable to the current 
audit objectives. 



 

 

Assigning Auditors 




Requirements: Assigning Auditors 

8.31 Audit management should assign sufficient auditors with 
adequate collective professional competence, as described in 
paragraphs 4.02 through 4.15, to conduct the audit. Staffing an audit 
includes, among other things, 

a. assigning auditors with the collective knowledge, skills, and 
abilities appropriate for the audit; 
b. assigning a sufficient number of auditors to the audit; 
c. providing for on-the-job training of auditors; and 





d. engaging specialists when necessary. 


8.32 If planning to use the work of specialists, auditors should 
document the nature and scope of the work to be performed by the 
specialists, including 

a. the objectives and scope of the specialists’ work, 
b. the intended use of the specialists’ work to support the audit 
objectives, 
c. the specialists’ procedures and findings so they can be 
evaluated and related to other planned audit procedures, and 
d. the assumptions and methods used by the specialists. 




 

 

Preparing a Written Audit 
Plan 




Requirement: Preparing a Written Audit Plan 

8.33 Auditors must prepare a written audit plan for each audit. Auditors 
should update the plan, as necessary, to reflect any significant 
changes to the plan made during the audit. 



 

Application Guidance: Preparing a Written Audit Plan 

8.34 The form and content of the written audit plan may vary among 
audits and may include an audit strategy, audit program, project plan, 
audit planning paper, or other appropriate documentation of key decisions 
about the audit objectives, scope, and methodology and the auditors’ 
basis for those decisions. 

8.35 A written audit plan provides an opportunity for audit organization 
management to supervise audit planning and to determine whether 

a. the proposed audit objectives are likely to result in a useful report; 
b. the audit plan adequately addresses relevant risks; 



c. the proposed audit scope and methodology are adequate to 
address the audit objectives; 
d. available evidence is likely to be sufficient and appropriate for 
purposes of the audit; and 
e. sufficient staff, supervisors, and specialists with adequate 
collective professional competence and other resources are 
available to conduct the audit and to meet expected time frames 
for completing the work. 


 


Conducting the 
Engagement 



 

 

 


Nature and Profile of the 
Program and User Needs 



Requirement: Nature and Profile of the Program and User Needs 

8.36 Auditors should obtain an understanding of the nature of the 
program or program component under audit and the potential use that 
will be made of the audit results or report as they plan a performance 
audit. The nature and profile of a program include 

a. visibility, sensitivity, and relevant risks associated with the 
program under audit; 
b. age of the program or changes in its condition; 
c. the size of the program in terms of total dollars, number of 
citizens affected, or other measures; 
d. level and extent of review or other forms of independent 
oversight; 
e. the program’s strategic plan and objectives; and 
f. external factors or conditions that could directly affect the 
program. 




 


Application Guidance: Nature and Profile of the Program and User 
Needs 

8.37 One group of users of the audit report is government officials or 
other parties who authorize or request audits. Other important users of 
the audit report are the audited entity, those responsible for acting on the 
auditors’ recommendations, oversight organizations, and legislative 
bodies. Other potential users of the audit report include legislators or 
government officials (other than those who authorized or requested the 
audit), the media, interest groups, and individual citizens. In addition to an 
interest in the program, potential users may have an ability to influence 
the conduct of the program. An awareness of these potential users’ 
interests and influence can help auditors judge whether possible findings 
could be significant to relevant users. 

8.38 Obtaining an understanding of the program under audit helps 
auditors to assess the relevant risks associated with the program and the 
effect of the risks on the audit objectives, scope, and methodology. The 
auditors’ understanding may come from knowledge they already have 
about the program or knowledge they gain from inquiries, observations, 
and reviewing documents while planning the audit. The extent and 
breadth of those inquiries and observations will vary among audits based 
on the audit objectives, as will the need to understand individual aspects 
of the program, such as the following: 

a. Provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements: 
Government programs are usually created by law and are subject 
to specific laws and regulations. Laws and regulations usually set 
forth what is to be done, who is to do it, the purpose to be 
achieved, the population to be served, and related funding 
guidelines or restrictions. Government programs may also be 
subject to contracts or grant agreements. Thus, understanding the 
laws and legislative history establishing a program and the 
provisions of contracts or grant agreements is essential to 
understanding the program itself. Obtaining that understanding is 
also a necessary step in identifying the provisions of laws, 
regulations, contracts, and grant agreements that are significant 
within the context of the audit objectives. 
b. Purpose and goals: Purpose is the result or effect that is intended 
or desired from a program’s operation. Legislatures usually 
establish a program’s purpose when they provide authority for the 
program. Audited entity officials may provide more detailed 



information on the program’s purpose to supplement the 
authorizing legislation. Audited entity officials are sometimes 
asked to set goals for program performance and operations, 
including both output and outcome goals. Auditors may use the 
stated program purpose and goals as criteria for assessing 
program performance or may develop additional criteria to use 
when assessing performance. 
c. Internal control: Internal control is a process effected by an entity’s 
oversight body, management, and other personnel that provides 
reasonable assurance that the objectives of an entity will be 
achieved. Internal control comprises the plans, methods, policies, 
and procedures used to fulfill the mission, strategic plan, goals, 
and objectives of the entity. 
d. Inputs: Inputs are the amount of resources (in terms of, for 
example, money, material, or personnel) that is put into a 
program. These resources may come from within or outside the 
entity operating the program. Measures of inputs can have a 
number of dimensions, such as cost, timing, and quality. 
Examples of measures of inputs are dollars spent, employee 
hours expended, and square feet of building space used. 
e. Program operations: Program operations are the strategies, 
processes, and activities management uses to convert inputs into 
outputs. Program operations may be subject to internal control. 
f. Outputs: Outputs represent the quantity of goods or services 
produced by a program. For example, an output measure for a job 
training program could be the number of persons completing 
training, and an output measure for an aviation safety inspection 
program could be the number of safety inspections completed. 
g. Outcomes: Outcomes are accomplishments or results of a 
program. For example, an outcome measure for a job training 
program could be the percentage of trained persons obtaining a 
job and still in the workplace after a specified period. An example 
of an outcome measure for an aviation safety inspection program 
could be the percentage reduction in safety problems found in 
subsequent inspections or the percentage of problems deemed 
corrected in follow-up inspections. Such outcome measures show 
the progress made in achieving the stated program purposes of 
helping unemployed citizens obtain and retain jobs and improving 



the safety of aviation operations, respectively. Outcomes may be 
influenced by cultural, economic, physical, or technological factors 
outside the program. Auditors may use approaches drawn from 
other disciplines, such as program evaluation, to isolate the 
effects of the program from these other influences. Outcomes also 
include a program’s unexpected or unintentional effects, both 
positive and negative. 


 

Determining Significance 
and Obtaining an 
Understanding of Internal 
Control 




Requirements: Determining Significance and Obtaining an 
Understanding of Internal Control 

8.39 Auditors should determine and document whether internal control 
is significant to the audit objectives.69 

8.40 If it is determined that internal control is significant to the audit 
objectives, auditors should obtain an understanding of such internal 
control. 



69See fig.4 at the end of ch. 8 for a flowchart on consideration of internal control in a 
GAGAS performance audit. 

 

Application Guidance: Determining Significance and Obtaining an 
Understanding of Internal Control 

8.41 Consideration of internal control in a performance audit begins with 
determining the significance of internal control to the audit objectives and 
documenting that determination. Some factors that may be considered 
when determining the significance of internal control to the audit 
objectives include 

a. the subject matter under audit, such as the program or program 
component under audit, including the audited entity’s objectives 
for the program and associated inherent risks; 
b. the nature of findings and conclusions expected to be reported, 
based on the needs and interests of audit report users; 


 


c. the three categories of entity objectives (operations, reporting, and 
compliance);70 and 
d. the five components of internal control (control environment, risk 
assessment, control activities, information and communication, 
and monitoring) and the integration of the components. 


70The terminology used in this section is consistent with the definitions and concepts in 
the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission’s Internal 
Control—Integrated Framework (COSO Framework) and Standards for Internal Control in 
the Federal Government (GAO-14-704G) (Green Book). 

8.42 If internal control is significant to the audit objectives, auditors 
determine which of the five components of internal control are significant 
to the audit objectives, as all components of internal control are generally 
relevant, but not all components may be significant to the audit objectives. 
This determination can also identify the underlying principles, control 
objectives, or specific controls that are significant to the audit objectives. 
Determining which internal control components, principles, control 
objectives, and/or specific controls are significant to the audit objectives is 
a matter of professional judgment. 

8.43 Determining the significance of internal control may be an iterative 
process. As discussed in paragraph 8.09, the audit objectives can evolve 
and become more refined throughout the audit. When this occurs, the 
significance of internal control is determined and documented for the new 
or revised objectives. 

8.44 Determining the significance of internal control may be documented 
in formats such as narratives or tables. The documentation includes the 
conclusions on whether internal control is significant to the audit 
objectives, and if so, which components of internal control are significant 
to the audit objectives. The documentation may also include the factors 
considered and steps taken to perform the determination. 

8.45 Determining the significance of internal control to the audit objectives 
affects the audit planning required in paragraphs 8.03 through 8.07. 
Specifically, it enables auditors to determine whether to assess internal 
control as part of the audit and, if they do, to identify criteria for the 
assessment and plan the appropriate scope, methodology, and extent of 
internal control assessments to perform. 


8.46 The nature and extent of procedures auditors perform to obtain an 
understanding of internal control is a matter of professional judgment and 
may vary among audits based on audit objectives, audit risk, internal 
control deficiencies, and the auditors’ knowledge about internal control 
gained in prior audits. The understanding of internal control builds on the 
understanding of the program required in paragraph 8.36. The auditors’ 
understanding of internal control may be obtained through procedures 
such as inquiries, observations, inspection of documents and records, 
review of other audit reports, or direct tests. 

8.47 Approaches for obtaining an understanding of internal control may 
vary and may include consideration of entity-level controls, transaction-
level controls, or both. However, even when assessing only transaction-
level controls, it may be beneficial to gain an understanding of entity-level 
controls that may affect transaction-level controls by obtaining a broad 
understanding of the five components of internal control at the entity level. 
This involves considering the relationships between the components, 
which work together in an integrated manner in an effective internal 
control system, and the principles of internal control that support each 
component. In addition to obtaining a broad understanding of internal 
control at the entity level, auditors may also obtain an understanding of 
internal control at the transaction level for the specific programs and 
processes under audit. 

8.48 Obtaining an understanding of internal control assists auditors in 
identifying an audited entity’s key controls relevant to the audit objectives. 
Identifying key controls involves considering the entity’s objectives that 
are relevant to the audit and whether the entity has controls in place to 
achieve those objectives and address associated risks. Collectively, key 
controls are those controls necessary to achieve the entity’s control 
objectives and provide reasonable assurance of achieving the entity’s 
objectives. Key controls often have one or both of the following 
characteristics: 

a. Their failure may significantly affect the achievement of the entity’s 
objectives, yet not reasonably be detected in a timely manner by 
other controls. 
b. Their operation may prevent or detect other control failures before 
they have an opportunity to become significant to the achievement 
of the entity’s objectives. 


 


 

Assessing Internal Control 



Requirement: Assessing Internal Control 

8.49 If internal control is determined to be significant to the audit 
objectives, auditors should plan and perform audit procedures to 
assess internal control to the extent necessary to address the audit 
objectives. 



 

Application Guidance: Assessing Internal Control 

8.50 The auditors’ understanding of internal control provides a basis for 
determining the nature, timing, and extent of procedures for assessments 
of internal control, if such an assessment will be performed. Assessments 
of internal control in a performance audit are performed to the extent 
necessary to address the audit objectives. The levels of internal control 
assessment that may be performed based on the audit objectives are 
(1) assessing the design; (2) assessing the design and implementation; or 
(3) assessing the design, implementation, and operating effectiveness of 
controls that are significant to the audit objectives. 

8.51 Assessments of internal control involve designing and performing 
procedures to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence, as required in 
paragraphs 8.90 through 8.94, to support and document the auditors’ 
findings and conclusions on design, implementation, and/or operating 
effectiveness of controls that are significant to the audit objectives. The 
controls being assessed are generally the key controls identified during 
the planning phase of the engagement, which may include controls at 
both the entity and transaction levels. Changes may be made to the initial 
determination of key controls based on additional information gathered 
during the course of fieldwork. 

8.52 The design of internal control is assessed by determining whether 
controls individually and in combination are capable of achieving an 
objective and addressing the related risk. The implementation of internal 
control is assessed by determining if the control exists and has been 
placed into operation. The operating effectiveness of internal control is 
assessed by determining whether controls were applied at relevant times 
during the period under evaluation, the consistency with which they were 
applied, and by whom or by what means they were applied. A control 
cannot be effectively implemented if it was not effectively designed. A 
control cannot be operating effectively if it was not effectively designed 
and implemented. 


8.53 During the assessment of each control, deficiencies in internal 
control may be identified. A deficiency in internal control exists when the 
design, implementation, or operation of a control does not allow 
management or personnel to achieve control objectives and address 
related risks.71 A deficiency in design exists when a necessary control is 
missing or is not properly designed so that even if the control operates as 
designed, the control objective would not be met. A deficiency in 
implementation exists when a control is properly designed but not 
implemented correctly in the internal control system. A deficiency in 
operating effectiveness exists when a properly designed control does not 
operate as designed or the person performing the control does not have 
the necessary competence or authority to perform the control effectively. 

71See paras. 1.27g and 1.27k for definitions of control objective and entity objective. 

72See paras. 9.29 through 9.34 for a discussion of reporting on internal control. 

 

Internal Control 
Deficiencies 
Considerations 




Requirement: Internal Control Deficiencies Considerations 

8.54 Auditors should evaluate and document the significance of 
identified internal control deficiencies within the context of the audit 
objectives. 



 

Application Guidance: Internal Control Deficiencies Considerations 

8.55 Internal control deficiencies are evaluated for significance within the 
context of the audit objectives. Deficiencies are evaluated both on an 
individual basis and in the aggregate. Consideration is given to the 
correlation among deficiencies. This evaluation and the audit work 
performed form the basis of the auditors’ determination whether, 
individually or in combination, the deficiencies are significant within the 
context of the audit objectives.72 

8.56 Determining whether deficiencies are significant within the context of 
the audit objectives involves evaluating the following factors: 

a. Magnitude of impact: Magnitude of impact refers to the likely effect 
that the deficiency could have on the entity achieving its objectives 
and is affected by factors such as the size, pace, and duration of 



the deficiency’s impact. A deficiency may be more significant to 
one objective than another. 
b. Likelihood of occurrence: Likelihood of occurrence refers to the 
possibility of a deficiency impacting an entity’s ability to achieve its 
objectives. 
c. Nature of the deficiency: The nature of the deficiency involves 
factors such as the degree of subjectivity involved with the 
deficiency and whether the deficiency arises from fraud or 
misconduct. 


8.57 Internal control deficiencies are a type of finding, and the 
requirements related to developing the four elements of a finding in 
paragraph 8.116 apply. When determining the cause of internal control 
deficiencies, it may be helpful for auditors to perform an analysis to 
identify the root cause of the deficiencies. Identifying the root causes of 
internal control deficiencies may strengthen the quality of auditors’ 
recommendations for corrective actions. 

8.58 The following are examples of control deficiencies: 

a. Ineffective oversight by those charged with governance of the 
entity’s financial reporting, performance reporting, or internal 
control, or an ineffective overall governance structure. 
b. An ineffective internal audit function or risk assessment function at 
an entity for which such functions are important to the monitoring 
or risk assessment component of internal control, such as for a 
large or complex entity. 
c. Failure by management or those charged with governance to 
assess the effect of a deficiency previously communicated to them 
and either to correct it or to conclude that it does not need to be 
corrected. 
d. Inadequate controls for the safeguarding of assets. 
e. Inadequate design of information systems general, application, 
and user controls that prevents an information system from 
providing complete and accurate information consistent with 
financial, compliance, or performance reporting objectives or other 
current needs. 



f. Failure of an application control caused by a deficiency in the 
design or operation of an information system’s general controls. 
g. Employees or management who lack the qualifications and 
training to fulfill their assigned functions. 


 

Information Systems 
Controls Considerations 




Requirements: Information Systems Controls Considerations 

8.59 The effectiveness of significant internal controls frequently 
depends on the effectiveness of information systems controls. Thus, 
when obtaining an understanding of internal control significant to the 
audit objectives, auditors should also determine whether it is 
necessary to evaluate information systems controls. 

8.60 When information systems controls are determined to be 
significant to the audit objectives or when the effectiveness of 
significant controls depends on the effectiveness of information 
systems controls, auditors should then evaluate the design, 
implementation, and/or operating effectiveness of such controls. This 
evaluation includes other information systems controls that affect the 
effectiveness of the significant controls or the reliability of information 
used in performing the significant controls. Auditors should obtain a 
sufficient understanding of information systems controls necessary to 
assess audit risk and plan the audit within the context of the audit 
objectives. 

8.61 Auditors should determine which audit procedures related to 
information systems controls are needed to obtain sufficient, 
appropriate evidence to support the audit findings and conclusions. 

8.62 When evaluating information systems controls is an audit 
objective, auditors should test information systems controls to the 
extent necessary to address the audit objective. 



 

Application Guidance: Information Systems Controls Considerations 

8.63 Understanding information systems controls is important when 
information systems are used extensively throughout the program under 
audit and the fundamental business processes related to the audit 
objectives rely on information systems. Information systems controls 
consist of those internal controls that depend on information systems 


processing and include general controls, application controls, and user 
controls. 

a. Information systems general controls (entity-wide, system, and 
application levels) are the policies and procedures that apply to all 
or a large segment of an entity’s information systems. General 
controls help ensure the proper operation of information systems 
by creating the environment for proper operation of application 
controls. General controls include security management, logical 
and physical access, configuration management, segregation of 
duties, and contingency planning. 
b. Application controls, sometimes referred to as business process 
controls, are those controls that are incorporated directly into 
computer applications to help ensure the validity, completeness, 
accuracy, and confidentiality of transactions and data during 
application processing. Application controls include controls over 
input, processing, output, master file, interface, and the data 
management system. 
c. User controls are portions of controls that are performed by 
people interacting with information systems controls. A user 
control is an information systems control if its effectiveness 
depends on information systems processing or the reliability 
(accuracy, completeness, and validity) of information processed 
by information systems. 


8.64 An entity’s use of information systems controls may be extensive; 
however, auditors are primarily interested in those information systems 
controls that are significant to the audit objectives. Information systems 
controls are significant to the audit objectives if auditors determine that it 
is necessary to evaluate the effectiveness of these controls in order to 
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence. For example, an audit objective 
may involve evaluating the effectiveness of information systems controls 
related to certain systems, facilities, or entities. 

8.65 Audit procedures to evaluate the effectiveness of significant 
information systems controls include (1) gaining an understanding of the 
system as it relates to the information and (2) identifying and evaluating 
the general, application, and user controls that are critical to providing 
assurance over the reliability of the information required for the audit. 


8.66 The evaluation of information systems controls may be done in 
conjunction with the auditors’ consideration of internal control within the 
context of the audit objectives or as a separate audit objective or audit 
procedure, depending on the audit’s objectives. Depending on the 
significance of information systems controls to the audit objectives, the 
extent of audit procedures to obtain such an understanding may be 
limited or extensive. In addition, the nature and extent of audit risk related 
to information systems controls are affected by the hardware and 
software used, the configuration of the entity’s systems and networks, 
and the entity’s information systems strategy. 

8.67 The following factors may assist auditors in determining the 
significance of information system controls to the audit objectives: 

a. The extent to which internal controls that are significant to the 
audit depend on the reliability of information processed or 
generated by information systems. 
b. The availability of evidence outside the information system to 
support the findings and conclusions. It may not be possible for 
auditors to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence without 
evaluating the effectiveness of relevant information systems 
controls. For example, if information supporting the findings and 
conclusions is generated by information systems or its reliability 
depends on information systems controls, there may not be 
sufficient supporting or corroborating information or documentary 
evidence available other than that produced by the information 
systems. 
c. The relationship of information systems controls to data reliability. 
To obtain evidence about the reliability of computer-generated 
information, auditors may decide to evaluate the effectiveness of 
information systems controls as part of obtaining evidence about 
the reliability of the data. If the auditors conclude that information 
systems controls are effective, they may reduce the direct testing 
of data. 


 

 


Provisions of Laws, 
Regulations, Contracts, 
and Grant Agreements 



Requirement: Provisions of Laws, Regulations, Contracts, and 
Grant Agreements 

8.68 Auditors should identify any provisions of laws, regulations, 
contracts, and grant agreements that are significant within the context 
of the audit objectives and assess the risk that noncompliance with 
provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements could 
occur. Based on that risk assessment, the auditors should design and 
perform procedures to obtain reasonable assurance of detecting 
instances of noncompliance with provisions of laws, regulations, 
contracts, and grant agreements that are significant within the context 
of the audit objectives. 



 

Application Guidance: Provisions of Laws, Regulations, Contracts, 
and Grant Agreements 

8.69 Government programs are subject to many provisions of laws, 
regulations, contracts, and grant agreements. At the same time, these 
provisions’ significance within the context of the audit objectives varies 
widely, depending on the objectives of the audit. Auditors may consult 
with their legal counsel to (1) determine those laws and regulations that 
are significant to the audit objectives, (2) design tests of compliance with 
provisions of laws and regulations, and (3) evaluate the results of those 
tests. Auditors also may consult with their legal counsel when audit 
objectives require testing compliance with provisions of contracts or grant 
agreements. Depending on the circumstances of the audit, auditors may 
consult with others, such as investigative staff, other audit organizations 
or government entities that provided professional services to the audited 
entity, or law enforcement authorities, to obtain information on compliance 
matters. 

8.70 The auditors’ assessment of audit risk may be affected by such 
factors as the complexity or recent establishment of the laws, regulations, 
contracts, and grant agreements. The auditors’ assessment of audit risk 
also may be affected by whether the audited entity has controls that are 
effective in preventing or detecting noncompliance with provisions of 
laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements. If auditors obtain 
sufficient, appropriate evidence of the effectiveness of these controls, 
they can reduce their tests of compliance. 

 


Fraud 



Requirements: Fraud 

8.71 Auditors should assess the risk of fraud occurring that is 
significant within the context of the audit objectives. Audit team 
members should discuss among the team fraud risks, including factors 
such as individuals’ incentives or pressures to commit fraud, the 
opportunity for fraud to occur, and rationalizations or attitudes that 
could increase the risk of fraud. Auditors should gather and assess 
information to identify the risk of fraud that is significant within the 
scope of the audit objectives or that could affect the findings and 
conclusions. 

8.72 Assessing the risk of fraud is an ongoing process throughout the 
audit. When information comes to the auditors’ attention indicating that 
fraud, significant within the context of the audit objectives, may have 
occurred, auditors should extend the audit steps and procedures, as 
necessary, to (1) determine whether fraud has likely occurred and (2) if 
so, determine its effect on the audit findings. 



 

Application Guidance: Fraud 

8.73 Fraud involves obtaining something of value through willful 
misrepresentation. Whether an act is, in fact, fraud is determined through 
the judicial or other adjudicative system and is beyond auditors’ 
professional responsibility. 

8.74 Auditors may obtain information through discussion with officials of 
the audited entity or through other means to determine the susceptibility 
of a program to fraud, the extent to which the audited entity has 
implemented leading practices to manage fraud risks, the status of 
internal controls the audited entity has established to prevent and detect 
fraud, or the risk that officials of the audited entity could override internal 
control. An attitude of professional skepticism in assessing the risk of 
fraud assists auditors in assessing which factors or risks could 
significantly affect the audit objectives. 

8.75 In some circumstances, conditions such as the following could 
indicate a heightened risk of fraud: 

a. economic, programmatic, or entity operating conditions that 
threaten the entity’s financial stability, viability, or budget; 



b. the nature of the entity’s operations provide opportunities to 
engage in fraud; 
c. management’s monitoring of compliance with laws, regulations, 
and policies is inadequate; 
d. the organizational structure is unstable or unnecessarily complex; 
e. management communication or support for ethical standards is 
lacking; 
f. management is willing to accept unusually high levels of risk in 
making significant decisions; 
g. the entity has a history of impropriety, such as previous issues 
with fraud, questionable practices, or past audits or investigations 
with findings of questionable or criminal activity; 
h. operating policies and procedures have not been developed or are 
outdated; 
i. key documentation is lacking or does not exist; 
j. asset accountability or safeguarding procedures are lacking; 
k. a history of improper payments; 
l. evidence of false or misleading information; and 
m. evidence of unusual patterns and trends in contracting, 
procurement, acquisition, and other activities of the entity or 
program. 


8.76 If fraud that may have occurred is not significant within the context of 
the audit objectives, the auditors may perform additional audit work as a 
separate engagement or refer the matter to other parties with oversight 
responsibility or jurisdiction. 

 


Identifying Sources of 
Evidence and the Amount 
and Type of Evidence 
Required 




Requirements: Identifying Sources of Evidence and the Amount 
and Type of Evidence Required 

8.77 Auditors should identify potential sources of information that could 
be used as evidence. Auditors should determine the amount and type 
of evidence needed to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to 
address the audit objectives and adequately plan audit work. 

8.78 Auditors should evaluate whether any lack of sufficient, 
appropriate evidence is caused by internal control deficiencies or other 
program weaknesses, and whether the lack of sufficient, appropriate 
evidence could be the basis for audit findings. 



 

Application Guidance: Identifying Sources of Evidence and the 
Amount and Type of Evidence Required 

8.79 If auditors believe it is likely that sufficient, appropriate evidence will 
not be available, they may revise the audit objectives or modify the scope 
and methodology and determine alternative procedures to obtain 
additional evidence or other forms of evidence to address the current 
audit objectives. 

 

Using the Work of Others 




Requirements: Using the Work of Others 

8.80 Auditors should determine whether other auditors have 
conducted, or are conducting, audits that could be relevant to the 
current audit objectives. 

8.81 If auditors use the work of other auditors, they should perform 
procedures that provide a sufficient basis for using that work. Auditors 
should obtain evidence concerning the other auditors’ qualifications 
and independence and should determine whether the scope, quality, 
and timing of the audit work performed by the other auditors can be 
relied on in the context of the current audit objectives.73 



73See para. 5.80 for additional discussion on using the work of other auditors and peer 
review reports. 


Chapter 8: Fieldwork Standards forPerformance Audits

8.82If the engagement team intends to use the work of a specialist, it 
should assess the independence of the specialist.74
Application Guidance: Using the Work of Others

8.83The results of other auditors’work may be useful sources of 
information for planning and conducting the audit. If other auditors have 
identified areas that warrant further audit work or follow-up, their workmay influence the auditors’selection of objectives, scope, and 
methodology.
8.84Internal auditing isan important part of overall governance, 
accountability, and internal control. Akey role of many internal audit 
organizations is to provide assurance that internal controls are in place to 
adequately mitigate risks and achieve programgoals and objectives. 
Auditors may determine that it is appropriate to use the workof the 
internal auditors in assessing the effectiveness of design or operation of 
internal controls that are significant within the context of the audit 
objectives.
8.85If other auditors have completed audit work related to the objectivesof the current audit, the current auditors may be able to use the work ofthe other auditors to support findings or conclusions for the current audit 
and thereby avoid duplication of effort. Procedures that auditors mayperform in making thisdetermination include reviewing the other audit 
report, audit plan, or audit documentation, or performing tests of the otherauditors’work. The nature and extent of evidence needed will depend onthe significance of the other auditors’work to the current audit objectivesand the extent to which the auditorswill use that work.
8.86The engagement team’s assessment of the independence of 
specialistswho perform audit work includes identifying threats and 
applying any necessary safeguardsin the same manner as they would forauditors performing work on those audits.75
74See para. 1.27p for the definition of specialist.
75See paras. 3.18 through 3.108 for requirements and guidance related to independence.

Page 178GAO-21-368GGovernment Auditing Standards


Supervision 



Requirement: Supervision 

8.87 Auditors must properly supervise audit staff. 



 

Application Guidance: Supervision 

8.88 Audit supervision involves providing sufficient guidance and direction 
to auditors assigned to the audit to address the audit objectives and 
follow applicable requirements, while staying informed about significant 
problems encountered, reviewing the work performed, and providing 
effective on-the-job training. 

8.89 The nature and extent of the auditors’ supervision and the review of 
audit work may vary depending on a number of factors, such as the size 
of the audit organization, the significance of the work, and the experience 
of the auditors. 

 


Evidence 



Requirements: Evidence 

8.90 Auditors must obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a 
reasonable basis for addressing the audit objectives and supporting 
their findings and conclusions. 

8.91 In assessing the appropriateness of evidence, auditors should 
assess whether the evidence is relevant, valid, and reliable. 

8.92 In determining the sufficiency of evidence, auditors should 
determine whether enough appropriate evidence exists to address the 
audit objectives and support the findings and conclusions to the extent 
that would persuade a knowledgeable person that the findings are 
reasonable. 

8.93 When auditors use information provided by officials of the audited 
entity as part of their evidence, they should determine what the officials 
of the audited entity or other auditors did to obtain assurance over the 
reliability of the information. 

8.94 Auditors should evaluate the objectivity, credibility, and reliability 
of testimonial evidence. 




Application Guidance: Evidence 

8.95 Audit objectives may vary widely, as may the level of work 
necessary to assess the sufficiency and appropriateness of evidence to 
address the objectives. The concepts of audit risk and significance assist 
auditors in evaluating the audit evidence. Professional judgment assists 
auditors in determining the sufficiency and appropriateness of evidence 
taken as a whole. Interpreting, summarizing, or analyzing evidence is 
typically used in determining the sufficiency and appropriateness of 
evidence and in reporting the results of the audit work. 

8.96 When auditors use information that audited entity officials provided 
as part of their evidence, auditors may find it necessary to test 
management’s procedures to obtain assurance, perform direct testing of 
the information, or obtain additional corroborating evidence. The nature, 
timing, and extent of the auditors’ procedures will depend on the 
significance of the information to the audit objectives and the nature of the 
information being used. Using a risk-based approach, auditors may 
consider additional procedures if they become aware of evidence that 
conflicts with that provided by management. In their overall assessment, 
auditors may document how they resolved situations involving conflicting 
evidence.76 

76See para. 8.105 for a discussion of the relationship between testimonial and 
documentary evidence. 

8.97 Auditors may request that management provide written 
representations as to the accuracy and completeness of information 
provided. 

8.98 The nature, timing, and extent of audit procedures to assess 
sufficiency and appropriateness are affected by the effectiveness of the 
audited entity’s internal controls over the information, including 
information systems controls, and the significance of the information and 
the level of detail presented in the auditors’ findings and conclusions in 
the context of the audit objectives. The sufficiency and appropriateness of 
computer-processed information is assessed regardless of whether this 
information is provided to auditors or auditors independently extract it. 
Assessing the sufficiency and appropriateness of computer-processed 
information includes considering the completeness and accuracy of the 
data for the intended purposes. 


Sufficiency 

8.99 Sufficiency is a measure of the quantity of evidence used to support 
the findings and conclusions related to the audit objectives. 

8.100 When appropriate, auditors may use statistical methods to analyze 
and interpret evidence to assess its sufficiency. 

8.101 The sufficiency of evidence required to support the auditors’ 
findings and conclusions is a matter of the auditors’ professional 
judgment. The following presumptions are useful in judging the sufficiency 
of evidence. 

a. The greater the audit risk, the greater the quantity and quality of 
evidence required. 
b. Stronger evidence may allow less evidence to be used. 


Appropriateness 

8.102 Appropriateness is the measure of the quality of evidence that 
encompasses the relevance, validity, and reliability of evidence used for 
addressing the audit objectives and supporting findings and conclusions. 

a. Relevance refers to the extent to which evidence has a logical 
relationship with, and importance to, the issue being addressed. 
b. Validity refers to the extent to which evidence is a meaningful or 
reasonable basis for measuring what is being evaluated. In other 
words, validity refers to the extent to which evidence represents 
what it is purported to represent. 
c. Reliability refers to the consistency of results when information is 
measured or tested and includes the concepts of being verifiable 
or supported. For example, in establishing the appropriateness of 
evidence, auditors may test its reliability by obtaining supporting 
evidence, using statistical testing, or obtaining corroborating 
evidence. 
d. Having a large volume of evidence does not compensate for a 
lack of relevance, validity, or reliability. 



8.103 The degree of assurance associated with a performance audit is 
strongly associated with the appropriateness of evidence in relation to the 
audit objectives. Examples follow. 

a. The audit objectives might focus on verifying specific quantitative 
results presented by the audited entity. In these situations, the 
audit procedures would likely focus on obtaining evidence about 
the accuracy of the specific amounts in question. This work may 
include the use of statistical sampling. 
b. The audit objectives might focus on the performance of a specific 
program or activity in the audited entity. In these situations, the 
auditors may be provided information that the audited entity 
compiled in order to satisfy the audit objectives. The auditors may 
find it necessary to test the quality of the information, which 
includes both its validity and reliability. 
c. The audit objectives might focus on information that is used for 
widely accepted purposes and obtained from sources generally 
recognized as appropriate. For example, economic statistics 
issued by government agencies for purposes such as adjusting for 
inflation, or other such information issued by authoritative 
organizations, may be the best information available. In such 
cases, it may not be practical or necessary for auditors to perform 
procedures to verify the information. These decisions call for use 
of professional judgment based on the nature of the information, 
its common usage or acceptance, and how it is being used in the 
audit. 
d. The audit objectives might focus on comparisons or benchmarking 
between various government functions or agencies. These types 
of audits are especially useful for analyzing the outcomes of 
various public policy decisions. In these cases, auditors may 
perform analyses, such as comparative statistics of different 
jurisdictions or changes in performance over time, where it would 
be impractical to verify the detailed data underlying the statistics. 
Clear disclosure of the extent to which comparative information or 
statistics were evaluated or corroborated will likely be necessary 
to place the evidence in context for report users. 
e. The audit objectives might focus on trend information based on 
data that the audited entity provided. In this situation, auditors may 
assess the evidence by using overall analytical tests of underlying 



data, combined with knowledge and understanding of the systems 
or processes used for compiling information. 
f. The audit objectives might focus on identifying emerging and 
crosscutting issues using information that audited entities 
compiled or self-reported. In such cases, it may be helpful for the 
auditors to consider the overall appropriateness of the compiled 
information along with other information available about the 
program. Other sources of information, such as inspector general 
reports or other external audits, may provide the auditors with 
information regarding whether any unverified or self-reported 
information is consistent with or can be corroborated by these 
other external sources of information. 


8.104 In terms of its form and how it is collected, evidence may be 
categorized as physical, documentary, or testimonial. Physical evidence 
is obtained by auditors’ direct inspection or observation of people, 
property, or events. Such evidence may be documented in summary 
memos, photographs, videos, drawings, charts, maps, or physical 
samples. Documentary evidence is already existing information, such as 
letters, contracts, accounting records, invoices, spreadsheets, database 
extracts, electronically stored information, and management information 
on performance. Testimonial evidence is obtained through inquiries, 
interviews, focus groups, public forums, or questionnaires. Auditors 
frequently use analytical processes, including computations, 
comparisons, separation of information into components, and rational 
arguments, to analyze any evidence gathered to determine whether it is 
sufficient and appropriate. Evidence may be obtained by observation, 
inquiry, or inspection. Each type of evidence has its own strengths and 
weaknesses. The following contrasts are useful in judging the 
appropriateness of evidence. However, these contrasts are not adequate 
in themselves to determine appropriateness. The nature and types of 
evidence used to support auditors’ findings and conclusions are matters 
of the auditors’ professional judgment based on the audit objectives and 
audit risk. 

a. Evidence obtained when internal control is effective is generally 
more reliable than evidence obtained when internal control is 
weak or nonexistent.77 


77See paras. 8.39 through 8.67 for a discussion of internal control. 


b. Evidence obtained through the auditors’ direct physical 
examination, observation, computation, and inspection is 
generally more reliable than evidence obtained indirectly. 
c. Examination of original documents is generally more reliable than 
examination of copies. 
d. Testimonial evidence obtained under conditions in which persons 
may speak freely is generally more reliable than evidence 
obtained under circumstances in which the persons may be 
intimidated. 
e. Testimonial evidence obtained from an individual who is not 
biased and has direct knowledge about the area is generally more 
reliable than testimonial evidence obtained from an individual who 
is biased or has indirect or partial knowledge about the area. 
f. Evidence obtained from a knowledgeable, credible, and unbiased 
third party is generally more reliable than evidence obtained from 
management of the audited entity or others who have a direct 
interest in the audited entity. 


8.105 Testimonial evidence may be useful in interpreting or corroborating 
documentary or physical information. Documentary evidence may be 
used to help verify, support, or challenge testimonial evidence. 

8.106 Surveys generally provide self-reported information about existing 
conditions or programs. Evaluating the survey design and administration 
assists auditors in evaluating the objectivity, credibility, and reliability of 
the self-reported information. 

8.107 When sampling is used, the appropriate selection method will 
depend on the audit objectives. When a representative sample is needed, 
the use of statistical sampling approaches generally results in stronger 
evidence than that obtained from nonstatistical techniques. When a 
representative sample is not needed, a targeted selection may be 
effective if the auditors have isolated risk factors or other criteria to target 
the selection. 

 

 


Overall Assessment of 
Evidence 



Requirements: Overall Assessment of Evidence 

8.108 Auditors should perform and document an overall assessment of 
the collective evidence used to support findings and conclusions, 
including the results of any specific assessments performed to 
conclude on the validity and reliability of specific evidence. 

8.109 When assessing the overall sufficiency and appropriateness of 
evidence, auditors should evaluate the expected significance of 
evidence to the audit objectives, findings, and conclusions; available 
corroborating evidence; and the level of audit risk. If auditors conclude 
that evidence is not sufficient or appropriate, they should not use such 
evidence as support for findings and conclusions. 

8.110 When the auditors identify limitations or uncertainties in 
evidence that is significant to the audit findings and conclusions, they 
should perform additional procedures, as appropriate. 



 

Application Guidance: Overall Assessment of Evidence 

8.111 Professional judgments about the sufficiency and appropriateness 
of evidence are closely interrelated, as auditors interpret the results of 
audit testing and evaluate whether the nature and extent of the evidence 
obtained is sufficient and appropriate. 

8.112 Sufficiency and appropriateness of evidence are relative concepts, 
which may be thought of as a continuum rather than as absolutes. 
Sufficiency and appropriateness are evaluated in the context of the 
related findings and conclusions. For example, even though the auditors 
may identify some limitations or uncertainties about the sufficiency or 
appropriateness of some of the evidence, they may nonetheless 
determine that in total there is sufficient, appropriate evidence to support 
the findings and conclusions. 

8.113 The steps to assess evidence may depend on the nature of the 
evidence, how the evidence is used in the audit or report, and the audit 
objectives. 

a. Evidence is sufficient and appropriate when it provides a 
reasonable basis for supporting the findings or conclusions within 
the context of the audit objectives. 



b. Evidence is not sufficient or appropriate when (1) using the 
evidence carries an unacceptably high risk that it could lead 
auditors to reach an incorrect or improper conclusion; (2) the 
evidence has significant limitations, given the audit objectives and 
intended use of the evidence; or (3) the evidence does not provide 
an adequate basis for addressing the audit objectives or 
supporting the findings and conclusions. 


8.114 Evidence has limitations or uncertainties when its validity or 
reliability has not been assessed or cannot be assessed, given the audit 
objectives and the intended use of the evidence. Limitations also include 
errors identified by the auditors in their testing. 

8.115 Additional procedures that could address limitations or 
uncertainties in evidence that are significant to the audit findings and 
conclusions include 

a. seeking independent, corroborating evidence from other sources; 
b. redefining the audit objectives or the audit scope to eliminate the 
need to use the evidence; 
c. presenting the findings and conclusions so that the supporting 
evidence is sufficient and appropriate and describing in the report 
the limitations or uncertainties with the validity or reliability of the 
evidence, if such disclosure is necessary to avoid misleading the 
report users about the findings or conclusions; and 
d. determining whether to report the limitations or uncertainties as a 
finding, including any related significant internal control 
deficiencies. 


 

Findings 




Requirements: Findings 

8.116 As part of a performance audit, when auditors identify findings, 
they should plan and perform procedures to develop the criteria, 
condition, cause, and effect of the findings to the extent that these 
elements are relevant and necessary to achieve the audit objectives. 

8.117 Auditors should consider internal control deficiencies in their 




evaluation of identified findings when developing the cause element of 
the identified findings when internal control is significant to the audit 
objectives. 



 

Application Guidance: Findings 

8.118 Findings may involve deficiencies in internal control; 
noncompliance with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant 
agreements; or instances of fraud. 

8.119 Given the concept of accountability for use of public resources and 
government authority, evaluating internal control in a government 
environment may also include considering internal control deficiencies 
that result in waste or abuse. Because the determination of waste and 
abuse is subjective, auditors are not required to perform specific 
procedures to detect waste or abuse in performance audits. However, 
auditors may consider whether and how to communicate such matters if 
they become aware of them. Auditors may also discover that waste or 
abuse are indicative of fraud or noncompliance with provisions of laws, 
regulations, contracts, and grant agreements. 

8.120 Waste is the act of using or expending resources carelessly, 
extravagantly, or to no purpose. Importantly, waste can include activities 
that do not include abuse and does not necessarily involve a violation of 
law. Rather, waste relates primarily to mismanagement, inappropriate 
actions, and inadequate oversight. 

8.121 The following are examples of waste, depending on the facts and 
circumstances: 

a. Making travel choices that are contrary to existing travel policies 
or are unnecessarily extravagant or expensive. 
b. Making procurement or vendor selections that are contrary to 
existing policies or are unnecessarily extravagant or expensive. 


8.122 Abuse is behavior that is deficient or improper when compared with 
behavior that a prudent person would consider reasonable and necessary 
business practice given the facts and circumstances, but excludes fraud 
and noncompliance with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and 
grant agreements. Abuse also includes misuse of authority or position for 


personal financial interests or those of an immediate or close family 
member or business associate. 

8.123 The following are examples of abuse, depending on the facts and 
circumstances: 

a. Creating unneeded overtime. 
b. Requesting staff to perform personal errands or work tasks for a 
supervisor or manager. 
c. Misusing the official’s position for personal gain (including actions 
that could be perceived by an objective third party with knowledge 
of the relevant information as improperly benefiting an official’s 
personal financial interests or those of an immediate or close 
family member; a general partner; an organization for which the 
official serves as an officer, director, trustee, or employee; or an 
organization with which the official is negotiating concerning future 
employment). 


8.124 Criteria: To develop findings, criteria may include the laws, 
regulations, contracts, grant agreements, standards, measures, expected 
performance, defined business practices, and benchmarks against which 
performance is compared or evaluated. Criteria identify the required or 
desired state or expectation with respect to the program or operation. The 
term program includes processes, projects, studies, policies, operations, 
activities, entities, and functions. Criteria provide a context for evaluating 
evidence and understanding the findings, conclusions, and 
recommendations in the report. 

8.125 Condition: Condition is a situation that exists. The condition is 
determined and documented during the audit. 

8.126 Cause: The cause is the factor or factors responsible for the 
difference between the condition and the criteria, and may also serve as a 
basis for recommendations for corrective actions. Common factors 
include poorly designed policies, procedures, or criteria; inconsistent, 
incomplete, or incorrect implementation; or factors beyond the control of 
program management. Auditors may assess whether the evidence 
provides a reasonable and convincing argument for why the stated cause 
is the key factor contributing to the difference between the condition and 
the criteria. 


8.127 Effect or potential effect: The effect or potential effect is the 
outcome or consequence resulting from the difference between the 
condition and the criteria. When the audit objectives include identifying 
the actual or potential consequences of a condition that varies (either 
positively or negatively) from the criteria identified in the audit, effect is a 
measure of those consequences. Effect or potential effect may be used to 
demonstrate the need for corrective action in response to identified 
problems or relevant risks. 

8.128 The elements needed for a finding are related to the objectives of 
the audit. Thus, a finding or set of findings is complete to the extent that 
the audit objectives are addressed and the report clearly relates those 
objectives to the elements of a finding. For example, an audit objective 
may be to determine the current status or condition of program operations 
or progress in implementing legislative requirements, and not the related 
cause or effect. In this situation, developing the condition would address 
the audit objective, and developing the other elements of a finding would 
not be necessary. 

8.129 The cause of a finding may relate to an underlying internal control 
deficiency. For example, auditors conducting a compliance audit may find 
that an audited entity has not complied with certain legislation. Upon 
further evaluation, the auditors may find the root cause of the finding to be 
that one of the entity’s control activities was not properly designed. In this 
case, the finding would be an instance of noncompliance, but the cause 
of the finding would be an internal control deficiency. 

8.130 Considering internal control in the context of a comprehensive 
internal control framework, such as Standards for Internal Control in the 
Federal Government or Internal Control—Integrated Framework,78 can 
help auditors to determine whether underlying internal control deficiencies 
exist as the root cause of findings. When the audit objectives include 
explaining why a particular type of positive or negative program 
performance, output, or outcome identified in the audit occurred, the 
underlying deficiencies are referred to as cause. Identifying the cause of 

78The COSO Framework and the Green Book provide suitable and available criteria 
against which management may evaluate and report on the effectiveness of the entity’s 
internal control. The Green Book may be adopted by entities beyond those federal entities 
for which it is legally required, such as state, local, and quasi-governmental entities, as 
well as other federal entities and not-for-profit organizations, as a framework for an 
internal control system. 


problems may assist auditors in making constructive recommendations 
for correction. Auditors may identify deficiencies in program design or 
structure as the cause of deficient performance. Auditors may also 
identify deficiencies in internal control that are significant to the subject 
matter of the performance audit as the cause of deficient performance. In 
developing these types of findings, the deficiencies in program design or 
internal control would be described as the cause. Often the causes of 
deficient program performance are complex and involve multiple factors, 
including fundamental, systemic root causes. 
8.131 When the audit objectives include estimating the extent to which a 
program has caused changes in physical, social, or economic conditions, 
“effect” is a measure of the program’s impact. In this case, effect is the 
extent to which positive or negative changes in actual physical, social, or 
economic conditions can be identified and attributed to the program. 

 

Audit Documentation 




Requirements: Audit Documentation 

8.132 Auditors must prepare audit documentation related to planning, 
conducting, and reporting for each audit. Auditors should prepare audit 
documentation in sufficient detail to enable an experienced auditor, 
having no previous connection to the audit, to understand from the 
audit documentation the nature, timing, extent, and results of audit 
procedures performed; the evidence obtained; and its source and the 
conclusions reached, including evidence that supports the auditors’ 
significant judgments and conclusions. 

8.133 Auditors should prepare audit documentation that contains 
evidence that supports the findings, conclusions, and 
recommendations before they issue their report. 

8.134 Auditors should design the form and content of audit 
documentation to meet the circumstances of the particular audit. The 
audit documentation constitutes the principal record of the work that 
the auditors have performed in accordance with standards and the 
conclusions that the auditors have reached. The quantity, type, and 
content of audit documentation are a matter of the auditors’ 
professional judgment. 




8.135 Auditors should document the following: 

a. the objectives, scope, and methodology of the audit; 
b. the work performed and evidence obtained to support 
significant judgments and conclusions, as well as expectations 
in analytical procedures, including descriptions of transactions 
and records examined (for example, by listing file numbers, 
case numbers, or other means of identifying specific 
documents examined, though copies of documents examined 
or detailed listings of information from those documents are not 
required); and 
c. supervisory review, before the audit report is issued, of the 
evidence that supports the findings, conclusions, and 
recommendations contained in the audit report. 


8.136 When auditors do not comply with applicable GAGAS 
requirements because of law, regulation, scope limitations, restrictions 
on access to records, or other issues affecting the audit, the auditors 
should document the departure from the GAGAS requirements and the 
impact on the audit and on the auditors’ conclusions. 



 

Application Guidance: Audit Documentation 

8.137 Audit documentation is an essential element of audit quality. The 
process of preparing and reviewing audit documentation contributes to 
the quality of an audit. Audit documentation serves to (1) provide the 
principal support for the audit report, (2) aid auditors in conducting and 
supervising the audit, and (3) allow for the review of audit quality. 

8.138 An experienced auditor means an individual (whether internal or 
external to the audit organization) who possesses the competencies and 
skills that would have enabled him or her to conduct the performance 
audit. These competencies and skills include an understanding of (1) the 
performance audit processes, (2) GAGAS and applicable legal and 
regulatory requirements, (3) the subject matter associated with achieving 
the audit objectives, and (4) issues related to the audited entity’s 
environment. 

8.139 When documenting departures from the GAGAS requirements, the 
audit documentation requirements apply to departures from unconditional 


requirements and from presumptively mandatory requirements when 
alternative procedures performed in the circumstances were not sufficient 
to achieve the objectives of the requirements. 

 

Availability of Individuals 
and Documentation 




Requirement: Availability of Individuals and Documentation 

8.140 Subject to applicable provisions of laws and regulations, auditors 
should make appropriate individuals and audit documentation available 
upon request and in a timely manner to other auditors or reviewers. 



 

Application Guidance: Availability of Individuals and Documentation 

8.141 Underlying GAGAS audits is the premise that audit organizations in 
federal, state, and local governments and public accounting firms 
engaged to conduct audits in accordance with GAGAS cooperate in 
auditing programs of common interest so that auditors may use others’ 
work and avoid duplication of efforts. The use of auditors’ work by other 
auditors may be facilitated by contractual arrangements for GAGAS 
audits that provide for full and timely access to appropriate individuals 
and to audit documentation. 


Figure 4: Consideration of Internal Control in a Generally Accepted Government 
Auditing Standards Performance Audit 

 


 


Chapter 9: Reporting Standards for 
Performance Audits 



9.01 This chapter contains reporting requirements and guidance for 
performance audits conducted in accordance with generally accepted 
government auditing standards (GAGAS). Reporting requirements 
establish the auditors’ overall approach for communicating the results of a 
performance audit. For performance audits conducted in accordance with 
GAGAS, the requirements and guidance in chapters 1 through 5 and 
chapter 8 also apply. 

9.02 The reporting requirements for performance audits relate to reporting 
the auditors’ compliance with GAGAS, the form of the report, the report 
contents, obtaining the views of responsible officials, report distribution, 
reporting confidential or sensitive information, and discovery of insufficient 
evidence after report release. 

 


Reporting Auditors’ 
Compliance with 
GAGAS 



Requirements: Reporting Auditors’ Compliance with GAGAS 

9.03 When auditors comply with all applicable GAGAS requirements, 
they should use the following language, which represents an 
unmodified GAGAS compliance statement, in the audit report to 
indicate that they conducted the audit in accordance with GAGAS: 

We conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally 
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that 
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence 
to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based 
on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides 
a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit 
objectives. 

9.04 Audit organizations that meet the independence requirements for 
internal audit organizations, but not those for external audit 
organizations, should include in the GAGAS compliance statement, 
where applicable, a statement that they are independent per the 
GAGAS requirements for internal auditors. 

9.05 When auditors do not comply with all applicable GAGAS 
requirements, they should include a modified GAGAS compliance 
statement in the audit report. For performance audits, auditors should 
use a statement that includes either (1) the language in paragraph 





9.03, modified to indicate the requirements that were not followed, or 
(2) language indicating that the auditors did not follow GAGAS. 



 

 

 

Report Format 




Requirements: Report Format 

9.06 Auditors should issue audit reports communicating the results of 
each completed performance audit. 

9.07 Auditors should issue the audit report in a form that is appropriate 
for its intended use, either in writing or in some other retrievable 
form.79 



79See paras. 9.56 through 9.67 for a discussion of report distribution and reporting 
confidential or sensitive information. 

 

Application Guidance: Report Format 

9.08 The purposes of audit reports are to (1) clearly communicate the 
results of audits to those charged with governance, the appropriate 
officials of the audited entity, and the appropriate oversight officials and 
(2) facilitate follow-up to determine whether appropriate corrective actions 
have been taken. 

9.09 Auditors may present audit reports using electronic media through 
which report users and the audit organization can retrieve them. The 
users’ needs will influence the form of the audit report. Different forms of 
audit reports include written reports, letters, briefing slides, or other 
presentation materials. 

 


Report Content 



Requirements: Report Content, Including Objectives, Scope, and 
Methodology 

9.10 Auditors should prepare audit reports that contain (1) the 
objectives, scope, and methodology of the audit; (2) the audit results, 
including findings, conclusions, and recommendations, as appropriate; 




(3) a summary of the views of responsible officials; and (4) if 
applicable, the nature of any confidential or sensitive information 
omitted. 

9.11 Auditors should communicate audit objectives in the audit report 
in a clear, specific, neutral, and unbiased manner that includes 
relevant assumptions. In order to avoid potential misunderstanding, 
when audit objectives are limited but users could infer broader 
objectives, auditors should state in the audit report that certain issues 
were outside the scope of the audit. 

9.12 Auditors should describe the scope of the work performed and 
any limitations, including issues that would be relevant to likely users, 
so that report users can reasonably interpret the findings, conclusions, 
and recommendations in the report without being misled. Auditors 
should also report any significant constraints imposed on the audit 
approach by information limitations or scope impairments, including 
denials of, or excessive delays in, access to certain records or 
individuals. 

9.13 In describing the work performed to address the audit objectives 
and support the reported findings and conclusions, auditors should, as 
applicable, explain the relationship between the population and the 
items tested; identify entities, geographic locations, and the period 
covered; report the kinds and sources of evidence; and explain any 
significant limitations or uncertainties based on the auditors’ overall 
assessment of the sufficiency and appropriateness of the evidence in 
the aggregate. 

9.14 In reporting audit methodology, auditors should explain how the 
completed audit work supports the audit objectives, including the 
evidence-gathering and evidence-analysis techniques, in sufficient 
detail to allow knowledgeable users of their reports to understand how 
the auditors addressed the audit objectives. Auditors should identify 
significant assumptions made in conducting the audit; describe 
comparative techniques applied; describe the criteria used; and, when 
the results of sample testing significantly support the auditors’ findings, 
conclusions, or recommendations, describe the sample design and 
state why the design was chosen, including whether the results can be 
projected to the intended population. 




Application Guidance: Report Content, Including Objectives, Scope, 
and Methodology 

9.15 Report users need information regarding the audit objectives, scope, 
and methodology to understand the purpose of the audit; the nature and 
extent of the audit work performed; the context and perspective regarding 
what is reported; and any significant limitations in the audit objectives, 
scope, or methodology. 

9.16 In reporting audit methodology, auditors may include a description of 
the procedures performed as part of their assessment of the sufficiency 
and appropriateness of information used as audit evidence. 

9.17 The auditor may use the report quality elements of accurate, 
objective, complete, convincing, clear, concise, and timely when 
developing and writing the audit report as the subject permits. 

a. Accurate: An accurate report is supported by sufficient, 
appropriate evidence with key facts, figures, and findings being 
traceable to the audit evidence. Reports that are fact-based, with 
a clear statement of sources, methods, and assumptions so that 
report users can judge how much weight to give the evidence 
reported, assist in achieving accuracy. Disclosing data limitations 
and other disclosures also contribute to producing more accurate 
audit reports. Reports also are more accurate when the findings 
are presented in the broader context of the issue. One way to help 
the audit organization prepare accurate audit reports is to use a 
quality control process such as referencing. Referencing is a 
process in which an experienced auditor who is independent of 
the audit checks that statements of facts, figures, and dates are 
correctly reported; the findings are adequately supported by the 
evidence in the audit documentation; and the conclusions and 
recommendations flow logically from the evidence. 
b. Objective: Objective means that the presentation of the report is 
balanced in content and tone. A report’s credibility is significantly 
enhanced when it presents evidence in an unbiased manner and 
in the proper context. This means presenting the audit results 
impartially and fairly. The tone of reports may encourage decision 
makers to act on the auditors’ findings and recommendations. 
This balanced tone can be achieved when reports present 
sufficient, appropriate evidence to support conclusions while 
refraining from using adjectives or adverbs that characterize 



evidence in a way that implies criticism or unsupported 
conclusions. The objectivity of audit reports is enhanced when the 
report explicitly states the source of the evidence and the 
assumptions used in the analysis. The report may recognize the 
positive aspects of the program reviewed if applicable to the audit 
objectives. Inclusion of positive program aspects may lead to 
improved performance by other government organizations that 
read the report. Audit reports are more objective when they 
demonstrate that the work has been performed by professional, 
unbiased, independent, and knowledgeable personnel. 
c. Complete: Being complete means that the report contains 
sufficient, appropriate evidence needed to satisfy the audit 
objectives and promote an understanding of the matters reported. 
It also means the report states evidence and findings without 
omission of significant relevant information related to the audit 
objectives. Providing report users with an understanding means 
providing perspective on the extent and significance of reported 
findings, such as the frequency of occurrence relative to the 
number of cases or transactions tested and the relationship of the 
findings to the entity’s operations. Being complete also means 
clearly stating what was and was not done and explicitly 
describing data limitations, constraints imposed by restrictions on 
access to records, or other issues. 
d. Convincing: Being convincing means that the audit results are 
responsive to the audit objectives, that the findings are presented 
persuasively, and that the conclusions and recommendations flow 
logically from the facts presented. The validity of the findings, the 
reasonableness of the conclusions, and the benefit of 
implementing the recommendations are more convincing when 
supported by sufficient, appropriate evidence. Reports designed in 
this way can help focus the attention of responsible officials on the 
matters that warrant attention and can provide an incentive for 
taking corrective action. 
e. Clear: Clarity means the report is easy for the intended user to 
read and understand. Preparing the report in language as clear 
and simple as the subject permits assists auditors in achieving this 
goal. Use of straightforward, nontechnical language is helpful to 
simplify presentation. Defining technical terms, abbreviations, and 
acronyms that are used in the report is also helpful. Auditors may 
use a highlights page or summary within the report to capture the 



report user’s attention and highlight the overall message. If a 
summary is used, it is helpful if it focuses on the audit objectives, 
summarizes the audit’s most significant findings and the report’s 
principal conclusions, and prepares users to anticipate the major 
recommendations. Logical organization of material and accuracy 
and precision in stating facts and in drawing conclusions assist in 
the report’s clarity and understandability. Effective use of titles and 
captions and topic sentences makes the report easier to read and 
understand. Visual aids (such as pictures, charts, graphs, and 
maps) may help clarify and summarize complex material. 
f. Concise: Being concise means that the report is no longer than 
necessary to convey and support the message. Extraneous detail 
detracts from a report and may even conceal the real message 
and confuse or distract the users. Although room exists for 
considerable judgment in determining the content of reports, those 
that are fact-based but concise are likely to achieve results. 
g. Timely: To be of maximum use, providing relevant evidence in 
time to respond to officials of the audited entity, legislative 
officials, and other users’ legitimate needs is the auditors’ goal. 
Likewise, the evidence provided in the report is more helpful if it is 
current. Therefore, the timely issuance of the report is an 
important reporting goal for auditors. During the audit, the auditors 
may provide interim reports of significant matters to appropriate 
entity and oversight officials. Such communication alerts officials 
to matters needing immediate attention and allows them to take 
corrective action before the final report is completed. 


 

Reporting Findings, 
Conclusions, and 
Recommendations 




Requirements: Reporting Findings, Conclusions, and 
Recommendations 

9.18 In the audit report, auditors should present sufficient, appropriate 
evidence to support the findings and conclusions in relation to the audit 
objectives. Auditors should provide recommendations for corrective 
action if findings are significant within the context of the audit 
objectives. 

9.19 Auditors should report conclusions based on the audit objectives 
and the audit findings. 




9.20 Auditors should describe in their report limitations or uncertainties 
with the reliability or validity of evidence if (1) the evidence is 
significant to the findings and conclusions within the context of the 
audit objectives and (2) such disclosure is necessary to avoid 
misleading the report users about the findings and conclusions. 
Auditors should describe the limitations or uncertainties regarding 
evidence in conjunction with the findings and conclusions, in addition 
to describing those limitations or uncertainties as part of the objectives, 
scope, and methodology. 

9.21 Auditors should place their findings in perspective by describing 
the nature and extent of the issues being reported and the extent of 
the work performed that resulted in the findings. To give the reader a 
basis for judging the prevalence and consequences of these findings, 
auditors should, as appropriate, relate the instances identified to the 
population or the number of cases examined and quantify the results in 
terms of dollar value or other measures. If the results cannot be 
projected, auditors should limit their conclusions appropriately. 

9.22 When reporting on the results of their work, auditors should 
disclose significant facts relevant to the objectives of their work and 
known to them that if not disclosed could mislead knowledgeable 
users, misrepresent the results, or conceal significant improper or 
illegal practices. 

9.23 When feasible, auditors should recommend actions to correct 
deficiencies and other findings identified during the audit and to 
improve programs and operations when the potential for improvement 
in programs, operations, and performance is substantiated by the 
reported findings and conclusions. Auditors should make 
recommendations that flow logically from the findings and conclusions, 
are directed at resolving the cause of identified deficiencies and 
findings, and clearly state the actions recommended. 



 

Application Guidance: Reporting Findings, Conclusions, and 
Recommendations 

9.24 The extent to which the elements for a finding are developed 
depends on the audit objectives. Clearly developed findings assist 
management and oversight officials of the audited entity in understanding 
the need for taking corrective action. 


9.25 As discussed in paragraphs 8.108 through 8.115, even though the 
auditors may have some uncertainty about the sufficiency or 
appropriateness of some of the evidence, they may nonetheless 
determine that in total there is sufficient, appropriate evidence given the 
findings and conclusions. Describing limitations provides report users with 
a clear understanding of how much responsibility the auditors are taking 
for the information. 

9.26 Auditors may provide background information to establish the 
context for the overall message and to help the reader understand the 
findings and significance of the issues discussed. Appropriate 
background information may include information on how programs and 
operations work; the significance of programs and operations (e.g., 
dollars, effect, purposes, and past audit work, if relevant); a description of 
the audited entity’s responsibilities; and explanation of terms, 
organizational structure, and the statutory basis for the program and 
operations. 

9.27 Report conclusions are logical inferences about the program based 
on the auditors’ findings, not merely a summary of the findings. The 
strength of the auditors’ conclusions depends on the persuasiveness of 
the evidence supporting the findings and the soundness of the logic used 
to formulate the conclusions. Conclusions are more compelling if they 
lead to recommendations and convince a knowledgeable user of the 
report that action is necessary. 

9.28 Effective recommendations encourage improvements in the conduct 
of government programs and operations. Recommendations are effective 
when they are addressed to parties with the authority to act and when the 
recommended actions are specific, feasible, cost-effective, and 
measurable. 

 

Reporting on Internal 
Control 




Requirements: Reporting on Internal Control 

9.29 When internal control is significant within the context of the audit 
objectives, auditors should include in the audit report (1) the scope of 
their work on internal control and (2) any deficiencies in internal control 
that are significant within the context of the audit objectives and based 
upon the audit work performed. 




9.30 When reporting on the scope of their work on internal control, 
auditors should identify the scope of internal control assessed to the 
extent necessary for report users to reasonably interpret the findings, 
conclusions, and recommendations in the audit report. 

9.31 When auditors detect deficiencies in internal control that are not 
significant to the objectives of the audit but warrant the attention of 
those charged with governance, they should include those deficiencies 
either in the report or communicate those deficiencies in writing to 
audited entity officials. If the written communication is separate from 
the audit report, auditors should refer to that written communication in 
the audit report. 



 

Application Guidance: Reporting on Internal Control 

9.32 Auditors may identify the control components, underlying principles, 
control objectives, or specific controls assessed in describing the scope of 
their work on internal control. Auditors may also identify the level of 
internal control assessment performed, as discussed in paragraph 8.50. 
Control components and underlying principles that are not considered 
significant to the audit objectives may be identified in the scope if, in the 
auditors’ professional judgment, doing so is necessary to preclude a 
misunderstanding of the breadth of the conclusions of the audit report and 
to clarify that control effectiveness has not been evaluated as a whole. 
Auditors may also identify and describe the five components of internal 
control so that report users understand the scope of the work within the 
context of the entity’s internal control system. 

9.33 An internal control system is effective if the five components of 
internal control are effectively designed, implemented, and operating, and 
are operating together in an integrated manner. The principles support 
the effective design, implementation, and operation of the associated 
components and represent requirements necessary to establish an 
effective internal control system. If a principle is not applied effectively, 
then the respective component cannot be effective. If a principle or 
component is not effective, or the components are not operating together 
in an integrated manner, then an internal control system cannot be 
effective. 

9.34 When auditors detect deficiencies in internal control that do not 
warrant the attention of those charged with governance, determining 


whether and how to communicate such deficiencies to audited entity 
officials is a matter of professional judgment. 

 


Reporting on 
Noncompliance with 
Provisions of Laws, 
Regulations, Contracts, 
and Grant Agreements 



Requirements: Reporting on Noncompliance with Provisions of 
Laws, Regulations, Contracts, and Grant Agreements 

9.35 Auditors should report a matter as a finding when they conclude, 
based on sufficient, appropriate evidence, that noncompliance with 
provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements either 
has occurred or is likely to have occurred that is significant within the 
context of the audit objectives. 

9.36 Auditors should communicate findings in writing to audited entity 
officials when the auditors detect instances of noncompliance with 
provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements that 
are not significant within the context of the audit objectives but warrant 
the attention of those charged with governance. 



 

Application Guidance: Reporting on Noncompliance with Provisions 
of Laws, Regulations, Contracts, and Grant Agreements 

9.37 Whether a particular act is, in fact, noncompliance with provisions of 
laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements may have to await 
final determination by a court of law or other adjudicative body.80 

80See paras. 8.27 through 8.29 for a discussion of investigations or legal proceedings. 

9.38 When auditors detect instances of noncompliance with provisions of 
laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements that do not warrant the 
attention of those charged with governance, the auditors’ determination of 
whether and how to communicate such instances to audited entity 
officials is a matter of professional judgment. 

9.39 When noncompliance with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, 
and grant agreements either has occurred or is likely to have occurred, 
auditors may consult with authorities or legal counsel about whether 
publicly reporting such information would compromise investigative or 
legal proceedings. Auditors may limit their public reporting to matters that 


would not compromise those proceedings and, for example, report only 
on information that is already a part of the public record. 

 


Reporting on Instances of 
Fraud 



Requirements: Reporting on Instances of Fraud 

9.40 Auditors should report a matter as a finding when they conclude, 
based on sufficient, appropriate evidence, that fraud either has 
occurred or is likely to have occurred that is significant to the audit 
objectives. 

9.41 Auditors should communicate findings in writing to audited entity 
officials when the auditors detect instances of fraud that are not 
significant within the context of the audit objectives but warrant the 
attention of those charged with governance. 



 

Application Guidance: Reporting on Instances of Fraud 

9.42 Whether a particular act is, in fact, fraud may have to await final 
determination by a court of law or other adjudicative body.81 

81See paras. 8.27 through 8.29 for a discussion of investigations or legal proceedings. 

9.43 When auditors detect instances of fraud that do not warrant the 
attention of those charged with governance, the auditors’ determination of 
whether and how to communicate such instances to audited entity 
officials is a matter of professional judgment. 

9.44 When auditors conclude fraud has occurred or is likely to have 
occurred, auditors may consult with authorities or legal counsel about 
whether publicly reporting such information would compromise 
investigative or legal proceedings. Auditors may limit their public reporting 
to matters that would not compromise those proceedings and, for 
example, report only on information that is already a part of the public 
record. 

 


Reporting Findings 
Directly to Parties outside 
the Audited Entity 




Requirements: Reporting Findings Directly to Parties outside the 
Audited Entity 

9.45 Auditors should report known or likely noncompliance with 
provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements or 
fraud directly to parties outside the audited entity in the following two 
circumstances. 

a. When audited entity management fails to satisfy legal or 
regulatory requirements to report such information to external 
parties specified in law or regulation, auditors should first 
communicate the failure to report such information to those 
charged with governance. If the audited entity still does not 
report this information to the specified external parties as soon 
as practicable after the auditors’ communication with those 
charged with governance, then the auditors should report the 
information directly to the specified external parties. 
b. When audited entity management fails to take timely and 
appropriate steps to respond to noncompliance with provisions 
of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements or 
instances of fraud that (1) are likely to have a significant effect 
on the subject matter and (2) involve funding received directly 
or indirectly from a government agency, auditors should first 
report management’s failure to take timely and appropriate 
steps to those charged with governance. If the audited entity 
still does not take timely and appropriate steps as soon as 
practicable after the auditors’ communication with those 
charged with governance, then the auditors should report the 
audited entity’s failure to take timely and appropriate steps 
directly to the funding agency. 


9.46 Auditors should comply with the requirements in paragraph 9.45 
even if they have resigned or been dismissed from the audit prior to its 
completion. 

9.47 Auditors should obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence, such as 
confirmation from outside parties, to corroborate representations by 
audited entity management that it has reported audit findings in 
accordance with provisions of laws, regulations, or funding 
agreements. When auditors are unable to do so, they should report 




such information directly, as discussed in paragraphs 9.45 and 9.46. 



 

Application Guidance: Reporting Findings Directly to Parties outside 
the Audited Entity 

9.48 The reporting in paragraph 9.45 is in addition to any legal 
requirements to report such information directly to parties outside the 
audited entity. 

9.49 Internal audit organizations do not have a duty to report outside the 
audited entity unless required by law, regulation, or policy. 

 


Obtaining the Views 
of Responsible 
Officials 



Requirements: Obtaining the Views of Responsible Officials 

9.50 Auditors should obtain and report the views of responsible 
officials of the audited entity concerning the findings, conclusions, and 
recommendations in the audit report, as well as any planned corrective 
actions. 

9.51 When auditors receive written comments from the responsible 
officials, they should include in their report a copy of the officials’ 
written comments or a summary of the comments received. When the 
responsible officials provide oral comments only, auditors should 
prepare a summary of the oral comments, provide a copy of the 
summary to the responsible officials to verify that the comments are 
accurately represented, and include the summary in their report. 

9.52 When the audited entity’s comments are inconsistent or in conflict 
with the findings, conclusions, or recommendations in the draft report, 
the auditors should evaluate the validity of the audited entity’s 
comments. If the auditors disagree with the comments, they should 
explain in the report their reasons for disagreement. Conversely, the 
auditors should modify their report as necessary if they find the 
comments valid and supported by sufficient, appropriate evidence. 

9.53 If the audited entity refuses to provide comments or is unable to 
provide comments within a reasonable period of time, the auditors may 
issue the report without receiving comments from the audited entity. In 
such cases, the auditors should indicate in the report that the audited 




entity did not provide comments. 



 

Application Guidance: Obtaining the Views of Responsible Officials 

9.54 Providing a draft report with findings for review and comment by 
responsible officials of the audited entity and others helps the auditors 
develop a report that is fair, complete, and objective. Including the views 
of responsible officials results in a report that presents not only the 
auditors’ findings, conclusions, and recommendations, but also the 
perspectives of the audited entity’s responsible officials and the corrective 
actions they plan to take. Obtaining the comments in writing is preferred, 
but oral comments are acceptable. In cases in which the audited entity 
provides technical comments in addition to its written or oral comments 
on the report, auditors may disclose in the report that such comments 
were received. Technical comments address points of fact or are editorial 
in nature and do not address substantive issues, such as methodology, 
findings, conclusions, or recommendations. 

9.55 Obtaining oral comments may be appropriate when, for example, 
there is a reporting date critical to meeting a user’s needs; auditors have 
worked closely with the responsible officials throughout the engagement, 
and the parties are familiar with the findings and issues addressed in the 
draft report; or the auditors do not expect major disagreements with 
findings, conclusions, or recommendations in the draft report, or major 
controversies with regard to the issues discussed in the draft report. 

 


Report Distribution 



Requirements: Report Distribution 

9.56 Distribution of reports completed in accordance with GAGAS 
depends on the auditors’ relationship with the audited organization and 
the nature of the information contained in the reports. Auditors should 
document any limitation on report distribution. Auditors should make 
audit reports available to the public, unless distribution is specifically 
limited by the terms of the engagement, law, or regulation. 

Report Distribution for Internal Auditors 

9.57 If an internal audit organization in a government entity follows the 
Institute of Internal Auditors’ International Standards for the 




Professional Practice of Internal Auditing as well as GAGAS, the head 
of the internal audit organization should communicate results to the 
parties who can ensure that the results are given due consideration. If 
not otherwise mandated by statutory or regulatory requirements, prior 
to releasing results to parties outside the organization, the head of the 
internal audit organization should (1) assess the potential risk to the 
organization, (2) consult with senior management or legal counsel as 
appropriate, and (3) control dissemination by indicating the intended 
users in the report. 

Report Distribution for External Auditors 

9.58 An audit organization in a government entity should distribute 
audit reports to those charged with governance, to the appropriate 
audited entity officials, and to the appropriate oversight bodies or 
organizations requiring or arranging for the audits. As appropriate, 
auditors should also distribute copies of the reports to other officials 
who have legal oversight authority or who may be responsible for 
acting on audit findings and recommendations and to others 
authorized to receive such reports. 

9.59 A public accounting firm contracted to conduct an audit in 
accordance with GAGAS should clarify report distribution 
responsibilities with the engaging party. If the contracting firm is 
responsible for the distribution, it should reach agreement with the 
party contracting for the audit about which officials or organizations will 
receive the report and the steps being taken to make the report 
available to the public. 



 

Application Guidance: Report Distribution for External Auditors 

9.60 Making an audit report available to the public can involve auditors 
posting the audit report to their publicly accessible websites or verifying 
that the audited entity has posted the audit report to its publicly accessible 
website. 

 


Reporting 
Confidential or 
Sensitive Information 



Requirements: Reporting Confidential or Sensitive Information 

9.61 If certain information is prohibited from public disclosure or is 




excluded from a report because of its confidential or sensitive nature, 
auditors should disclose in the report that certain information has been 
omitted and the circumstances that make the omission necessary. 

9.62 When circumstances call for omission of certain information, 
auditors should evaluate whether this omission could distort the audit 
results or conceal improper or illegal practices and revise the report 
language as necessary to avoid report users drawing inappropriate 
conclusions from the information presented. 

9.63 When the audit organization is subject to public records laws, 
auditors should determine whether public records laws could affect the 
availability of classified or limited use reports and determine whether 
other means of communicating with management and those charged 
with governance would be more appropriate. Auditors use judgment to 
determine the appropriate means to communicate the omitted 
information to management and those charged with governance 
considering, among other things, whether public records laws could 
affect the availability of classified or limited use reports. 



 

Application Guidance: Reporting Confidential or Sensitive 
Information 

9.64 If the report refers to the omitted information, the reference may be 
general and not specific. If the omitted information is not necessary to 
meet the audit objectives, the report need not refer to its omission. 

9.65 Certain information may be classified or may otherwise be prohibited 
from general disclosure by federal, state, or local laws or regulations. In 
such circumstances, auditors may issue a separate, classified, or limited 
use report containing such information and distribute the report only to 
persons authorized by law or regulation to receive it. 

9.66 Additional circumstances associated with public safety, privacy, or 
security concerns could justify the exclusion of certain information from a 
publicly available or widely distributed report. For example, detailed 
information related to computer security for a particular program may be 
excluded from publicly available reports because of the potential damage 
that misuse of this information could cause. In such circumstances, 
auditors may issue a limited use report containing such information and 
distribute the report only to those parties responsible for acting on the 
auditors’ recommendations. In some instances, it may be appropriate to 


issue both a publicly available report with the sensitive information 
excluded and a limited use report. The auditors may consult with legal 
counsel regarding any requirements or other circumstances that may 
necessitate omitting certain information. Considering the broad public 
interest in the program or activity under audit assists auditors when 
deciding whether to exclude certain information from publicly available 
reports. 

9.67 In cases described in paragraph 9.63, auditors may communicate 
general information in a written report and communicate detailed 
information orally. Auditors may consult with legal counsel regarding 
applicable public records laws. 


 


Discovery of 
Insufficient Evidence 
after Report Release 



Requirement: Discovery of Insufficient Evidence after Report 
Release 

9.68 If, after the report is issued, the auditors discover that they did not 
have sufficient, appropriate evidence to support the reported findings 
or conclusions, they should communicate in the same manner as that 
used to originally distribute the report to those charged with 
governance, the appropriate officials of the audited entity, the 
appropriate officials of the entities requiring or arranging for the audits, 
and other known users, so that they do not continue to rely on the 
findings or conclusions that were not supported. If the report was 
previously posted to the auditors’ publicly accessible website, the 
auditors should remove the report and post a public notification that 
the report was removed. The auditors should then determine whether 
to perform the additional audit work necessary to either reissue the 
report, including any revised findings or conclusions, or repost the 
original report if the additional audit work does not result in a change in 
findings or conclusions. 



 

 

 


Glossary 



The following terms are provided to assist in clarifying the Government 
Auditing Standards. The most relevant paragraph numbers are provided 
for reference. When terminology differs from that used at an organization 
subject to generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS), 
auditors use professional judgment to determine if there is an equivalent 
term. 

Abuse: Behavior that is deficient or improper when compared with 
behavior that a prudent person would consider reasonable and necessary 
business practice given the facts and circumstances, but excludes fraud 
and noncompliance with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and 
grant agreements. (paragraphs 6.23, 7.25, and 8.122) 

Agreed-upon procedures engagement: Consists of auditors performing 
specific procedures on subject matter or an assertion and reporting 
findings without providing an opinion or a conclusion on it. (paragraph 
1.18c) 

Appropriateness: The measure of the quality of evidence that 
encompasses the relevance, validity, and reliability of evidence used for 
addressing the audit objectives and supporting findings and conclusions. 
(paragraph 8.102) 

Attestation engagement: An examination, review, or agreed-upon 
procedures engagement conducted under the GAGAS attestation 
standards related to subject matter or an assertion that is the 
responsibility of another party. (paragraph 1.27a) 

Audit: Either a financial audit or performance audit conducted in 
accordance with GAGAS. (paragraph 1.27b) 

Audit objectives: What the audit is intended to accomplish. They identify 
the audit subject matter and performance aspects to be included. Audit 
objectives can be thought of as questions about the program that the 
auditors seek to answer based on evidence obtained and assessed 
against criteria. Audit objectives may also pertain to the current status or 
condition of a program. (paragraph 8.08) 

Audit organization: A government audit entity or a public accounting firm 
or other audit entity that conducts GAGAS engagements. (paragraph 
1.27c) 


Audit procedures: The specific steps and tests auditors perform to 
address the audit objectives. (paragraph 8.11) 

Audit report: A report issued as a result of a financial audit, attestation 
engagement, review of financial statements, or performance audit 
conducted in accordance with GAGAS. (paragraph 1.27d) 

Audit risk: The possibility that the auditors’ findings, conclusions, 
recommendations, or assurance may be improper or incomplete. The 
assessment of audit risk involves both qualitative and quantitative 
considerations. (paragraph 8.16) 

Audited entity: The entity that is subject to a GAGAS engagement, 
whether that engagement is a financial audit, attestation engagement, 
review of financial statements, or performance audit. (paragraph 1.27e) 

Auditor: An individual assigned to planning, directing, performing 
engagement procedures or reporting on GAGAS engagements (including 
work on audits, attestation engagements, and reviews of financial 
statements) regardless of job title. Therefore, individuals who may have 
the title auditor, information technology auditor, analyst, practitioner, 
evaluator, inspector, or other similar titles are considered auditors under 
GAGAS. (paragraph 1.27f) 

Bias threat: The threat that an auditor will, as a result of political, 
ideological, social, or other convictions, take a position that is not 
objective. (paragraph 3.30c) 

Cause: The factor or factors responsible for the difference between the 
condition and the criteria, which may also serve as a basis for 
recommendations for corrective actions. (paragraphs 6.27, 7.29, and 
8.126) 

Competence: The knowledge, skills, and abilities, obtained from 
education and experience, necessary to conduct the GAGAS 
engagement. Competence enables auditors to make sound professional 
judgments. Competence includes possessing the technical knowledge 
and skills necessary for the assigned role and the type of work being 
done. This includes possessing specific knowledge about GAGAS. 
(paragraph 4.05) 

Condition: A situation that exists. The condition is determined and 
documented during the engagement. (paragraphs 6.26, 7.28, and 8.125) 


Control objective: The aim or purpose of specified controls; control 
objectives address the risks related to achieving an entity’s objectives. 
(paragraph 1.27g) 

CPE programs: Structured educational activities or programs with 
learning objectives designed to maintain or enhance the auditors’ 
competence to address engagement objectives and perform work in 
accordance with GAGAS. (paragraph 4.32) 

Criteria: Laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements, standards, 
measures, expected performance, defined business practices, and 
benchmarks against which performance is compared or evaluated. 
Criteria identify the required or desired state or expectation with respect 
to the program or operation. Criteria provide a context for evaluating 
evidence and understanding the findings, conclusions, and 
recommendations in the report. (paragraphs 6.25, 7.27, and 8.124) 

Directing: Supervising the efforts of others who are involved in 
accomplishing the objectives of the engagement or reviewing 
engagement work to determine whether those objectives have been 
accomplished. (paragraph 4.11b) 

Education: A structured and systematic process aimed at developing 
knowledge, skills, and other abilities; it is a process that is typically but not 
exclusively conducted in academic or learning environments. (paragraph 
4.06) 

Effect or potential effect: The outcome or consequence resulting from 
the difference between the condition and the criteria. (paragraphs 6.28, 
7.30, and 8.127) 

Engagement: A financial audit, attestation engagement, review of 
financial statements, or performance audit conducted in accordance with 
GAGAS. (paragraph 1.27h) 

Engagement partner or director: The partner or director assigned 
responsibility for a specific engagement as designated by the audit 
organization. (paragraph 5.37) 

Engagement team (or audit team): Auditors assigned to planning, 
directing, performing engagement procedures or reporting on GAGAS 
engagements. (paragraph 1.27i) 


Engaging party: The party that engages the auditor to conduct a 
GAGAS engagement. (paragraph 1.27j) 

Entity objective: What an entity wants to achieve; entity objectives are 
intended to meet the entity’s mission, strategic plan, and goals and the 
requirements of applicable laws and regulations. (paragraph 1.27k) 

Examination: Consists of obtaining reasonable assurance by obtaining 
sufficient, appropriate evidence about the measurement or evaluation of 
subject matter against criteria in order to be able to draw reasonable 
conclusions on which to base the auditor’s opinion about whether the 
subject matter is in accordance with (or based on) the criteria or the 
assertion is fairly stated, in all material respects. (paragraph 1.18a) 

Experience: Workplace activities that are relevant to developing 
professional proficiency. (paragraph 4.06) 

External audit organization: An audit organization that issues reports to 
third parties external to the audited entity, either exclusively or in addition 
to issuing reports to senior management and those charged with 
governance of the audited entity. (paragraph 1.27l) 

Familiarity threat: The threat that aspects of a relationship with 
management or personnel of an audited entity, such as a close or long 
relationship, or that of an immediate or close family member, will lead an 
auditor to take a position that is not objective. (paragraph 3.30d) 

Financial audits: Provide an independent assessment of whether an 
entity’s reported financial information (e.g., financial condition, results, 
and use of resources) is presented fairly, in all material respects, in 
accordance with recognized criteria. (paragraph 1.17) 

Finding: An issue that may involve a deficiency in internal control; 
noncompliance with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, or grant 
agreements; or instances of fraud. Elements of a finding generally include 
criteria, condition, cause, and effect or potential effect. (paragraphs 6.17, 
6.19, 7.19, 7.21, 8.116, and 8.118) 

Fraud: Involves obtaining something of value through willful 
misrepresentation. Whether an act is, in fact, fraud is determined through 
the judicial or other adjudicative system and is beyond auditors’ 
professional responsibility. (paragraph 8.73) 


Independence in appearance: The absence of circumstances that 
would cause a reasonable and informed third party to reasonably 
conclude that the integrity, objectivity, or professional skepticism of an 
audit organization or member of the engagement team had been 
compromised. (paragraph 3.21b) 

Independence of mind: The state of mind that permits the conduct of an 
engagement without being affected by influences that compromise 
professional judgment, thereby allowing an individual to act with integrity 
and exercise objectivity and professional skepticism. (paragraph 3.21a) 

Inputs: The amount of resources (in terms of, for example, money, 
material, or personnel) that is put into a program. These resources may 
come from within or outside the entity operating the program. Measures 
of inputs can have a number of dimensions, such as cost, timing, and 
quality. (paragraph 8.38d) 

Integrity: Auditors performing their work with an attitude that is objective, 
fact-based, nonpartisan, and nonideological with regard to audited entities 
and users of the audit reports and making decisions consistent with the 
public interest of the program or activity under audit. (paragraphs 3.09 
and 3.10) 

Internal audit organization: An audit organization that is accountable to 
senior management and those charged with governance of the audited 
entity and that does not generally issue reports to third parties external to 
the audited entity. (paragraph 1.27m) 

Internal control: A process effected by an entity’s oversight body, 
management, and other personnel that provides reasonable assurance 
that the objectives of an entity will be achieved. (paragraph 1.22b) 

Likelihood of occurrence: The possibility of a deficiency impacting an 
entity’s ability to achieve its objectives. (paragraph 8.56b) 

Magnitude of impact: The likely effect that a deficiency could have on 
the entity achieving its objectives. (paragraph 8.56a) 

Management participation threat: The threat that results from an 
auditor’s taking on the role of management or otherwise performing 
management functions on behalf of the audited entity, which will lead an 
auditor to take a position that is not objective. (paragraph 3.30f) 


Methodology: The nature and extent of audit procedures for gathering 
and analyzing evidence to address the audit objectives. (paragraph 8.11) 

Monitoring of quality: A process comprising an ongoing consideration 
and evaluation of the audit organization’s system of quality control. 
(paragraph 5.47) 

Nature of the deficiency: Involves factors such as the degree of 
subjectivity involved with the deficiency and whether the deficiency arises 
from fraud or misconduct. (paragraph 8.56c) 

Nonsupervisory auditor: An auditor who plans or performs engagement 
procedures and whose work situation is characterized by low levels of 
ambiguity, complexity, and uncertainty. (paragraph 4.10a) 

Objectivity: The basis for the credibility of auditing in the government 
sector. Objectivity includes independence of mind and appearance when 
conducting engagements, maintaining an attitude of impartiality, having 
intellectual honesty, and being free of conflicts of interest. (paragraph 
3.11) 

Outcomes: Accomplishments or results of a program. (paragraph 8.38g) 

Outputs: The quantity of goods or services produced by a program. 
(paragraph 8.38f) 

Partners and directors: Auditors who plan engagements, perform 
engagement procedures, or direct or report on engagements and whose 
work situations are characterized by high levels of ambiguity, complexity, 
and uncertainty. Partners and directors may also be responsible for 
reviewing engagement quality prior to issuing the report, for signing the 
report, or both. (paragraph 4.10c) 

Peer review risk: The risk that the review team (1) fails to identify 
significant weaknesses in the reviewed audit organization’s system of 
quality control for its auditing practice, its lack of compliance with that 
system, or a combination thereof; (2) issues an inappropriate opinion on 
the reviewed audit organization’s system of quality control for its auditing 
practice, its compliance with that system, or a combination thereof; or 
(3) makes an inappropriate decision about the matters to be included in, 
or excluded from, the peer review report. (paragraph 5.68) 


Performance audits: Engagements that provide objective analysis, 
findings, and conclusions to assist management and those charged with 
governance and oversight to, among other things, improve program 
performance and operations, reduce costs, facilitate decision making by 
parties with responsibility to oversee or initiate corrective action, and 
contribute to public accountability. In a performance audit, the auditors 
measure or evaluate the subject matter of the audit and present the 
resulting information as part of, or accompanying, the audit report. 
(paragraphs 1.21 and 8.14) 

Period of professional engagement: The period beginning when the 
auditors either sign an initial engagement letter or other agreement to 
conduct an engagement or begin to conduct an engagement, whichever 
is earlier. The period lasts for the duration of the professional 
relationship—which, for recurring engagements, could cover many 
periods—and ends with the formal or informal notification, either by the 
auditors or the audited entity, of the termination of the professional 
relationship or with the issuance of a report, whichever is later. 
(paragraph 3.23) 

Performing engagement procedures: Performing tests and procedures 
necessary to accomplish the engagement objectives in accordance with 
GAGAS. (paragraph 4.11c) 

Planning: Determining engagement objectives, scope, and methodology; 
establishing criteria to evaluate matters subject to audit; or coordinating 
the work of the other audit organization. This definition excludes auditors 
whose role is limited to gathering information used in planning the 
engagement. (paragraph 4.11a) 

Presumptively mandatory requirements: Auditors and the audit 
organization must comply in all cases where such a requirement is 
relevant except in rare circumstances discussed in paragraphs 2.03, 2.04, 
and 2.08. GAGAS uses should to indicate a presumptively mandatory 
requirement. (paragraph 2.02b) 

Professional behavior: Behavior that includes auditors avoiding any 
conduct that could bring discredit to their work and putting forth an honest 
effort in performing their duties in accordance with the relevant technical 
and professional standards. (paragraph 3.16) 

Professional judgment: Use of the auditor’s professional knowledge, 
skills, and abilities, in good faith and with integrity, to diligently gather 


information and objectively evaluate the sufficiency and appropriateness 
of evidence. Professional judgment includes exercising reasonable care 
and professional skepticism. (paragraphs 3.109 through 3.117) 

Program: Includes processes, projects, studies, policies, operations, 
activities, entities, and functions. (paragraph 8.08) 

Program operations: The strategies, processes, and activities 
management uses to convert inputs into outputs. Program operations 
may be subject to internal control. (paragraph 8.38e) 

Public interest: The collective well-being of the community of people and 
entities that the auditors serve. (paragraph 3.07) 

Reasonable and informed third party: As evaluated by a hypothetical 
person, a person who possesses skills, knowledge, and experience to 
objectively evaluate the appropriateness of the auditor’s judgments and 
conclusions. This evaluation entails weighing all the relevant facts and 
circumstances, including any safeguards applied, that the auditor knows, 
or could reasonably be expected to know, at the time that the evaluation 
is made. (paragraph 3.46) 

Reporting: Determining the report content and substance or reviewing 
reports to determine whether the engagement objectives have been 
accomplished and the evidence supports the report’s technical content 
and substance prior to issuance. This includes signing the report. 
(paragraph 4.11d) 

Responsible party: The party responsible for a GAGAS engagement’s 
subject matter. (paragraph 1.27n) 

Review: Consists of obtaining limited assurance by obtaining sufficient, 
appropriate review evidence about the measurement or evaluation of 
subject matter against criteria in order to express a conclusion about 
whether any material modifications should be made to the subject matter 
in order for it to be in accordance with (or based on) the criteria or to the 
assertion in order for it to be fairly stated. Review-level work does not 
include reporting on internal control or compliance with provisions of laws, 
regulations, contracts, and grant agreements. (paragraph 1.18b) 

Review of financial statements: The objective of the auditor when 
performing a review of financial statements is to obtain limited assurance 
as a basis for reporting whether the auditor is aware of any material 


modifications that should be made to financial statements in order for the 
financial statements to be in accordance with the applicable financial 
reporting framework. A review of financial statements does not include 
obtaining an understanding of the entity’s internal control, assessing fraud 
risk, or certain other procedures ordinarily performed in an audit. 
(paragraph 1.20) 

Safeguards: Actions or other measures, individually or in combination, 
that auditors and the audit organization take that effectively eliminate 
threats to independence or reduce them to an acceptable level. 
(paragraph 3.49) 

Scope: The boundary of the audit and is directly tied to the audit 
objectives. The scope defines the subject matter that the auditors will 
assess and report on, such as a particular program or aspect of a 
program, the necessary documents or records, the period of time 
reviewed, and the locations that will be included. (paragraph 8.10) 

Self-interest threat: The threat that a financial or other interest will 
inappropriately influence an auditor’s judgment or behavior. (paragraph 
3.30a) 

Self-review threat: The threat that an auditor or audit organization that 
has provided nonaudit services will not appropriately evaluate the results 
of previous judgments made or services provided as part of the nonaudit 
services when forming a judgment significant to a GAGAS engagement. 
(paragraph 3.30b) 

Significance: The relative importance of a matter within the context in 
which it is being considered, including quantitative and qualitative factors. 
In the performance audit requirements, the term significant is comparable 
to the term material as used in the context of financial statement 
engagements. (paragraph 8.15) 

Source documents: Documents providing evidence that transactions 
have occurred (for example, purchase orders, payroll time records, 
customer orders, and contracts). Such records also include an audited 
entity’s general ledger and subsidiary records or equivalent. (paragraph 
3.92) 

Specialist: An individual or organization possessing special skill or 
knowledge in a particular field other than accounting or auditing that 


assists auditors in conducting engagements. A specialist may be either 
an internal specialist or an external specialist. (paragraph 1.27p) 

Structural threat: The threat that an audit organization’s placement 
within a government entity, in combination with the structure of the 
government entity being audited, will affect the audit organization’s ability 
to perform work and report results objectively. (paragraph 3.30g) 

Sufficiency: A measure of the quantity of evidence used to support the 
findings and conclusions related to the audit objectives. (paragraph 8.99) 

Supervisory auditor: An auditor who plans engagements, performs 
engagement procedures, or directs engagements, and whose work 
situation is characterized by moderate levels of ambiguity, complexity, 
and uncertainty. (paragraph 4.10b) 

Technical comments: Comments that address points of fact or are 
editorial in nature and do not address substantive issues, such as 
methodology, findings, conclusions, or recommendations. (paragraphs 
6.61, 7.59, and 9.54) 

Those charged with governance: The individuals responsible for 
overseeing the strategic direction of the entity and obligations related to 
the accountability of the entity. This includes overseeing the financial 
reporting process, subject matter, or program under audit, including 
related internal controls. Those charged with governance may also be 
part of the entity’s management. In some audited entities, multiple parties 
may be charged with governance, including oversight bodies, members or 
staff of legislative committees, boards of directors, audit committees, or 
parties contracting for the engagement. (paragraph 1.04) 

Unconditional requirement: Requirement with which auditors and the 
audit organization must comply in all cases where such requirement is 
relevant. GAGAS uses must to indicate an unconditional requirement. 
(paragraph 2.02a) 

Undue influence threat: The threat that influences or pressures from 
sources external to the audit organization will affect an auditor’s ability to 
make objective judgments. (paragraph 3.30e) 

Waste: The act of using or expending resources carelessly, 
extravagantly, or to no purpose. Waste can include activities that do not 


include abuse and does not necessarily involve a violation of law. 
(paragraphs 6.21, 7.23, and 8.120) 

 


Acknowledgments 



Comptroller General’s 
Advisory Council on 
Government Auditing 
Standards (2016-
2020) 



Drummond Kahn, Chair 
International Institute and Government Audit Training Institute 
Graduate School USA 

Corey Arvizu 
Heinfeld, Meech & Co., P.C. 

Dr. Brett M. Baker 
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Office of the Inspector General 

Jon Hatfield 
U.S. Federal Maritime Commission, Office of the Inspector General 

Philip M. Heneghan 
U.S. International Trade Commission, Office of the Inspector General 

Mary L. Kendall 
U.S. Department of the Interior, Office of the Inspector General 

Deborah V. Loveless 
Tennessee Comptroller of the Treasury, Division of State Audit 

Martha S. Mavredes 
Auditor of Public Accounts of the Commonwealth of Virginia 

Kimberly K. McCormick 
Grant Thornton LLP 

Amanda Nelson 
KPMG LLP 

Dr. Demetra Smith Nightingale 
Urban Institute 

Dr. Annette K. Pridgen 
Jackson State University 

Dianne Ray 
Colorado Office of the State Auditor 

Harriet Richardson 
City of Palo Alto 


Randy C. Roberts 
Arizona Office of the Auditor General 

Brian A. Schebler 
RSM US LLP 

Ronald Smith 
RHR Smith & Company CPAs 

 

GAO Project Team 




James R. Dalkin, Director 
Kristen A. Kociolek, Assistant Director 
Christie A. Pugnetti, Auditor in Charge 
Michael F. Bingham, Senior Auditor 
Mary Ann Hardy, Senior Auditor 
Rebecca A. Riklin, Senior Auditor 


J. Lawrence Malenich, Managing Director, Financial Management and 
Assurance 
Robert F. Dacey, Chief Accountant 

 


Staff 
Acknowledgments 



In addition to the project team named above, also contributing were Mark 
Cheung, Clayton T. Clark, Oliver A. Culley, Francine M. DelVecchio, 
Vincent Gomes, John R. Grobarek, Sean P. Joyce, Jason M. Kelly, 
Delores J. Lee, Aaron M. Livernois, Quang D. Nguyen, Grant L. 
Simmons, Adrienne N. Walker, Kimberly Y. Young, and Matthew P. Zaun. 

(104743) 




GAO’s Mission 

The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation, and investigative 
arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional 
responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the 
federal government for the American people. GAO examines the use of public 
funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, 
recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed 
oversight, policy, and funding decisions. GAO’s commitment to good government 
is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. 

Obtaining Copies of 
GAO Reports and 
Testimony 




The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is 
through our website. Each weekday afternoon, GAO posts on its website newly 
released reports, testimony, and correspondence. You can also subscribe to 
GAO’s email updates to receive notification of newly posted products. 


Order Printed Copies 



The printed version of the Government Auditing Standards 2018 Revision 
Technical Update April 2021 can be ordered through the Government Publishing 
Office (GPO) online http://bookstore.gpo.gov/ or by calling 202-512-1800 or 1-
866-512-1800 toll free. 


Connect with GAO 



Connect with GAO on Facebook, Flickr, Twitter, and YouTube. 
Subscribe to our RSS Feeds or Email Updates. Listen to our Podcasts. 
Visit GAO on the web at https://www.gao.gov. 


To Report Fraud, 
Waste, and Abuse in 
Federal Programs 



Contact FraudNet: 

Website: https://www.gao.gov/about/what-gao-does/fraudnet 

Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7700 


Congressional 
Relations 



Orice Williams Brown, Managing Director, WilliamsO@gao.gov, (202) 512-4400, 
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7125, 
Washington, DC 20548 


Public Affairs 



Chuck Young, Managing Director, youngc1@gao.gov, (202) 512-4800 
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149 
Washington, DC 20548 


Recycle!PleasePrintRecycledPaper
PleasePrintonRecycledPaper.
Strategic Planning and 
External Liaison 



Stephen J. Sanford, Acting Managing Director, spel@gao.gov, (202) 512-4707 
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7814, 
Washington, DC 20548 

 




