(Document certified by Superintendent of Documents <pkisupport@gpo.gov>) Signed by Superintendent of Documents <pkisupport@gpo.gov> Time: 2013.09.12 16:37:23 Z Reason: GPO attests that this document has not been altered since it was disseminated by GPO Location: US GPO, Washington, DC 20401

107 STAT. 286 PUBLIC LAW 103-62—AUG. 3, 1993 

SEC. 3. STRATEGIC PLANNING. 

Chapter 3 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding 
after section 305 the following new section: 

"§ 306. Strategic plans 

"(a) No later than September 30, 1997, the head of each agency 
shall submit to the Director of the Office of Management and 
Budget and to the Congress a strategic plan for program activities. 
Such plan shall contain— 

"(1) a comprehensive mission statement covering the major 
functions and operations of the agency; 

"(2) general goals and objectives, including outcome-related 
goals and objectives, for the major functions and operations 
of the agency; 

"(3) a description of how the goals and objectives are to 
be achieved, including a description of the operationed processes, 
skills and technology, and the human, capital, information, 
and other resources required to meet those goals and objectives; 

"(4) a description of how the performance goals included 
in the plan required by section 1115(a) of title 31 shall be 
related to the general goals and objectives in the strategic 
plan; 

"(5) an identification of those key factors external to the 
agency and beyond its control that could significantly affect 
the achievement of the general goals and objectives; and 

"(6) a description of the program evaluations used in 
establishing or revising genersd goals and objectives, with a 
schedule for future program evaluations. 
"(b) The strategic plan shall cover a period of not less than 

five years forward from the fiscal year in which it is submitted, 
and shall be updated and revised at least every three years. 

"(c) The performance plan required by section 1115 of title 
31 shall be consistent with the agenc3r's strategic plan. A performance 
plan may not be submitted for a fiscal year not covered 
by a current strategic plan under this section. 

"(d) When developing a strategic plan, the agency shall consult 
with the Congress, and shall solicit and consider the views and 
suggestions of those entities potentially affected by or interested 
in such a plan. 

"(e) TTie fimctions and activities of this section shall be considered 
to be inherently (Jovemmental functions. The drafting of 
strategic plans under this section shall be performed only by Federal 
employees. 

"(i) For purposes of this section the term 'agency' means an 
Executive agency defined under section 105, but does not include 
the Central Intelligence Agency, the General Accounting Office, 
the Panama Canal Commission, the United States Postal Service, 
and the Postal Rate Commission.". 

SEC. 4. ANNUAL PERFORMANCE PLANS AND REPORTS. 

(a) BUDGET CONTENTS AND SUBMISSION TO CONGRESS.—Section 
1105(a) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end thereof the following new paragraph: 
"(29) beginning with fiscal year 1999, a Federal (Jovemment 
performance plan for the overall budget as provided for 
under section 1115. . 


PUBLIC LAW 103-62—AUG. 3, 1993 107 STAT. 287 

(b) PERFORMANCE PLANS AND REPORTS.—Chapter 11 of title 
31, United States Code, is amended by adding after section 1114 
the following new sections: 
**§ 1115. Performance plans 

"(a) In canying out the provisions of section 1105(a)(29), the 
Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall require 
each agency to prepare an annual performance plan covering each 
program activity set forth in the budget of such agency. Such 
plan shall— 

"(1) establish performance goals to define the level of 
performance to be achieved by a program activity; 

"(2) express such goals in an objective, quantifiable, and 
measurable form unless authorized to be in an alternative 
form under subsection (b); 

"(3) briefly describe the operational processes, skills and 
technology, and the human, capital, imormation, or other 
resources required to meet the performance goals; 

"(4) establish performance indicators to be used in measuring 
or assessing the relevEint outputs, service levels, and outcomes 
of each program activity; 

"(5) provide a basis for comparing actual program results 
with the established performance goals; and 

"(6) describe the means to be used to verify and validate 
measured values. 
"(b) If an agency, in consultation with the Director of the 

Office of Management and Budget, determines that it is not feasible 
to express the performance goals for a particular program activity 
in an objective, quantifiable, and measurable form, the Director 
of the Office of Management and Budget may authorize an alternative 
form. Such alternative form shall— 

"(1) include separate descriptive statements of— 
"(A)(i) a minimally effective program, and 
"(ii) a successful program, or 
"(B) such alternative as authorized by the Director 

of the Office of Management and Budget, 
with sufficient precision and in such terms that would allow 
for an accurate, independent determination of whether the program 
activit/s performance meets the criteria of the description; 
or 

"(2) state whv it is infeasible or impractical to express 
a performance goal in any form for the program activity. 
"(c) For the purpose of complying with this section, an agency 

may aggregate, disaggregate, or consolidate program activities, 
except that any aggregation or consolidation may not omit or minimize 
the significance of any program activity constituting a major 
fiinction or operation for the agency. 

"(d) An agency may submit with its annual performance plan 
an appendix covering any portion of the plan that— 

"(1) is specifically authorized under criteria established 
by an Executive order to be kept secret in the interest of 
national defense or foreign policy; and 

"(2) is properly classified pursuant to such Executive order. 

"(e) The functions and activities of this section shall be considered 
to be inherently Governmental functions. The drafting of 
performance plans under this section shall be performed only by 
Federal employees. 


107 STAT. 288 PUBLIC LAW 103-62—AUG. 3, 1993 

"(f) For purposes of this section and sections 1116 through 
1119, and sections 9703 and 9704 the term— 
"(1) 'agency' has the same meaning as such term is defined 
under section 306(f) of title 5; 
"(2) 'outcome measure' means an assessment of the results 
of a program activity compared to its intended purpose; 

"(3) 'output measure' means the tabulation, calculation, 
or recording of activity or effort and can be expressed in a 
quantitative or qualitative manner; 

"(4) 'performance goal' means a target level of performance 
expressed as a tangible, measurable objective, against which 
actual achievement can be compared, including a goal expressed 
as a quantitative standard, value, or rate; 

"(5) 'performance indicator* means a particular value or 
characteristic used to measure output or outcome; 

"(6) 'program activity means a specific activity or project 
as listed in me program and financing schedules of the annual 
budget of the United States (jovemment; and 

"(7) 'program evaluation' means an assessment, through 
objective measurement and systematic analysis, of the manner 
and extent to which Federal programs achieve intended objectives. 


^§ 1116. Program performance reports 

"(a) No later than March 31, 2000, and no later than March 
31 of each year thereafter, the head of each agency shall prepare 
and submit to the President and the Congress, a report on program 
performance for the previous fiscal year. 

"(b)(1) Each program performance report shall set forth the 
performance indicators established in the agency performance plan 
under section 1115, along with the actual program performance 
achieved compared with the performance goals expressed in the 
plan for that fiscal year. 

"(2) If performance goals are specified in an alternative form 
under section 1115(b), the results of such program shall be described 
in relation to such specifications, including whether the performance 
failed to meet the criteria of a minimsuly effective or successful 
program. 

"(c) The report for fiscal year 2000 shall include actual results 
for the preceding fiscal year, the report for fiscal year 2001 shall 
include actual results for the two preceding fiscal years, and the 
report for fiscal year 2002 and all subsequent reports shall include 
actual results for the three preceding fiscal years. 

"(d) Each report shall— 
"(1) review the success of achieving the performeuice goals 
of the fiscal year; 

"(2) evaluate the performance plan for the current fiscal 
year relative to the performance achieved toward the performance 
goals in the fiscal year covered by the report; 

"(3) explain and describe, where a performance goal has 
not been met (including when a program activit^s performance 
is determined not to have met the criteria of a successful 
program activity under section 1115(b)(l)(A)(ii) or a corresponding 
level of achievement if another alternative form is used)— 

"(A) why the goal was not met; 
"(B) those plans and schedules for achieving the established 
performance goal; and 


PUBLIC LAW 103-62—AUG. 3, 1993 107 STAT. 289 

"(C) if the performance goal is impractical or infeasible, 

why that is the case and what action is recommended; 

"(4) describe the use and assess the effectiveness in achiev


ing performance goals of any waiver under section 9703 of 

this title; and 

"(5) include the summary findings of those program evalua


tions completed during the fiscal year covered by the report. 

"(e) An agency head may include all program performance 
information required annually under this section in an annual 
financial statement required under section 3515 if any such statement 
is submitted to the Congress no later than March 31 of 
the applicable fiscal year. 

"(f) The functions and activities of this section shall be considered 
to be inherently Governmental functions. The drafting of program 
performance reports under this section shall be performed 
only by Federal employees. 

«§ 1117. Exemption 

"The Director of the Office of Management and Budget may 
exempt from the requirements of sections 1115 and 1116 of this 
title and section 306 of title 5, £iny agency with annual outlays 
of $20,000,000 or less.". 

SEC. 5. MANAGERIAL ACCOUNTABILITY AND FLEXIBILITY. 

(a) MANAGERIAL ACCOUNTABILITY AND FLEXIBILITY.—Chapter 
97 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding after 
section 9702, the following new section: 
**§ 9703. Managerial accountability and flexibility 

"(a) Beginning with fiscal year 1999, the performance plans 
required under section 1115 may include proposals to waive 
administrative procedural requirements and controls, including 
specification of personnel staffing levels, limitations on compensation 
or remuneration, and prohibitions or restrictions on funding 
transfers among budget object classification 20 and subclassifications 
11, 12, 31, and 32 of each annual budget submitted 
under section 11()5, in return for specific individual or orgsuiization 
accountability to achieve a performance goal. In preparing and 
submitting the performance plan under section 1105(a)(29), the 
Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall review 
and may approve any proposed waivers. A waiver shall take effect 
at the beginning of the fiscal year for which the waiver is approved. 

"(b) Any such proposal under subsection (a) shall describe the 
anticipated effects on performance resulting from greater managerial 
or organizational flexibility, discretion, and authority, and shall 
quantify the expected improvements in performance resulting from 
any waiver. The expected improvements shall be compared to current 
actual performance, and to the projected level of performance 
that would be achieved independent of any waiver. 

"(c) Any proposal waiving limitations on compensation or remuneration 
shall precisely express the monetary change in compensation 
or remuneration amounts, such as bonuses or awards, that 
shall result from meeting, exceeding, or failing to meet performance 
goals. 

"(d) Any proposed waiver of procedural requirements or controls 
imposed by an agency (other than the proposing agency or the 
Office of Management and Budget) may not be included in a 


107 STAT. 290 PUBLIC LAW 103-62—AUG. 3, 1993 

performance plan unless it is endorsed by the agency that established 
the requirement, and the endorsement included in the proposing 
agency's performance plan. 

"(e) A waiver shall be in effect for one or two years as specified 
by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget in approving 
the waiver. A waiver may be renewed for a subsequent year. 
After a waiver has been in effect for three consecutive years, the 
performance plan prepared under section 1115 may propose that 
a waiver, other than a waiver of limitations on compensation or 
remuneration, be made permanent. 

"(f) For purposes of this section, the definitions under section 
1115(f) shall apply.". 

SEC. 6. PILOT PROJECTS. 

(a) PERFORMANCE PLANS AND REPORTS.—Chapter 11 of title 
31, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1117 
(as added by section 4 of this Act) the following new section: 
'*§ 1118. Pilot projects for performance goals 

"(a) The Director of the Office of Management and Budget, 
after consultation with the head of each agency, shall designate 
not less than ten agencies as pilot projects in performance measurement 
for fiscal years 1994, 1995, and 1996. The selected agencies 
shall reflect a representative range of Grovemment functions and 
capabilities in measuring and reporting program performance. 

"(b) Pilot projects in the designated agencies shall undertake 
the preparation of performance plans under section 1115, and program 
performance reports under section 1116, other than section 
1116(c), for one or more of the major functions and operations 
of the agency. A strategic plan shall be used when preparing agency 
performance plans during one or more years of the pilot period. 

Reports. "(c) No later than May 1, 1997, the Director of the Office 
of Management and Budget shall submit a report to the President 
and to the Congress which shall— 

"(1) assess the benefits, costs, and usefulness of the plans 
and reports prepared by the pilot agencies in meeting the 
purposes of tne Government Performance and Results Act of 
1993; 

"(2) identify any significant difficulties experienced by the 
pilot agencies in preparing plans and reports; and 

"(3) set forth any recommended changes in the requirements 
of the provisions of Government Performance and Results 
Act of 1993, section 306 of title 5, sections 1105, 1115, 1116, 
1117,1119 and 9703 of this title, and this section.". 

(b) MANAGERIAL ACCOUNTABILITY AND FLEXIBILITY.—Chapter 
97 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting after 
section 9703 (as added by section 5 of this Act) the following 
new section: 
^§9704. Pilot j^rojects for managerial accountability and 
flexibility 

"(a) The Director of the Office of Management and Budget 
shall designate not less than five agencies as pilot projects in 
managerial accountability and flexibility for fiscal years 1995 and 
1996. Such agencies shall be selected from those designated as 
pilot projects under section 1118 and shall reflect a representative 


PUBLIC LAW 103-62—AUG. 3, 1993 107 STAT. 291 

range of Grovernment functions and capabilities in measuring and 
reporting program performance. 

"(b) Pilot projects in the designated agencies shall include proposed 
waivers in accordance with section 9703 for one or more 
of the major functions and operations of the agency, 

"(c) The Director of the Office of Management and Budget 
shall include in the report to the President £ind to the Congress 
required under section 1118(c)— 

"(1) an assessment of the benefits, costs, and usefulness 
of increasing managerial and organizational flexibility, discretion, 
and authority in exchange for improved performance 
through a waiver; and 

"(2) an identification of any significant difficulties experienced 
by the pilot agencies in preparing proposed waivers. 
"(d) For purposes of this section the definitions under section 

1115(f) shall apply.". 

(c) PERFORMANCE BUDGETING.—Chapter 11 of title 31, United 
States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1118 (as added 
by section 6 of this Act) the following new section: 
"§ 1119. Pilot projects for performance budgeting 

"(a) The Director of the Office of Management and Budget, 
after consultation with the head of each agency shall designate 
not less than five agencies as pilot projects in performance budgeting 
for fiscal years 1998 and 1999. At least three of the agencies 
shall be selected from those designated as pilot projects under 
section 1118, and shall also reflect a representative range of (jovernment 
functions and capabilities in measuring and reporting program 
performance. 

"(b) Pilot projects in the designated agencies shall cover the 
preparation of performance budgets. Such budgets shall present, 
for one or more of the major functions and operations of the agency, 
the varying levels of performance, including outcome-related 
performance, that would result from different budgeted amounts. 

"(c) The Director of the Office of Management and Budget 
shall include, as an alternative budget presentation in the budget 
submitted under section 1105 for fiscal year 1999, the performance 
budgets of the designated agencies for this fiscal year. 

"(d) No later than March 31, 2001, the Director of the Office Reports. 
of Management and Budget shall transmit a report to the President 
and to the Congress on the performance budgeting pilot projects 
which shall— 

"(1) assess the feasibility and advisability of including a 
performance budget as part of the annual budget submitted 
under section 1105; 

"(2) describe any difficulties encountered by the pilot agencies 
in preparing a performance budget; 

"(3) recommend whether legislation requiring performance 
budgets should be proposed and the general provisions of any 
legislation; and 

"(4) set forth any recommended changes in the other 
requirements of the Government Performance and Results Act 
of 1993, section 306 of title 5, sections 1105, 1115, 1116, 1117, 
and 9703 of this title, and this section. 
"(e) After receipt of the report required under subsection (d), 

the Congress may specify that a performance budget be submitted 
as part of the annual budget submitted under section 1105.". 


107 STAT. 292 PUBLIC LAW 103-62—AUG. 3, 1993 

SEC. 7. UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE. 

Part III of title 39, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end thereof the following new chapter: 

"CHAPTER 28—STRATEGIC PLANNING AND 
PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT 

"Sec. 

"2801. Definitions. 

"2802. Strategic plans. 

"2803. Performance plans. 

"2804. Program performance reports. 

"2805. Inherently Grovemmental functions. 

''§2801. Definitions 

"For purposes of this chapter the term— 

(1) 'outcome measure' refers to an assessment of the 
results of a program activity compared to its intended purpose; 
"(2) 'output measure' refers to the tabulation, calculation, 
or recording of activity or effort and can be expressed in a 
quantitative or qualitative manner; 

"(3) 'performance goal' means a target level of performance 
expressed as a tangible, measurable objective, against which 
actual achievement shall be compared, including a goal 
expressed as a quantitative standard, value, or rate; 

"(4) 'performance indicator' refers to a particular value 
or characteristic used to measure output or outcome; 
"(5) 'program activity* means a specific activity related 
to the mission of the Postal Service; and 

"(6) 'program evaluation' means an assessment, through 
objective measurement and systematic analysis, of the manner 
and extent to which Postal Service programs achieve intended 
objectives. 

**§ 2802. Strategic plans 

"(a) No later than September 30, 1997, the Postal Service 
shall submit to the President and the Congress a strategic plan 
for its program activities. Such plan shall contain— 

"(1) a comprehensive mission statement covering the major 
functions and operations of the Postal Service; 

"(2) genersd goals and objectives, including outcome-related 
goals and objectives, for the major functions and operations 
of the Postal Service; 

"(3) a description of how the goals and objectives are to 
be achieved, including a description of the operational processes, 
skills and technology, and the human, capital, information, 
and other resources required to meet those goals and objectives; 

"(4) a description of how the performance goals included 
in the plan required under section 2803 shall be related to 
the general goals and objectives in the strategic plan; 

(5) an identification of those key factors external to the 
Postal Service and beyond its control that could significantly 
affect the achievement of the general goals and objectives; 
and 
"(6) a description of the program evaluations used in 
establishing or revising general goals and objectives, with a 
schedule for future program evaluations. 


PUBLIC LAW 103-62—AUG. 3, 1993 107 STAT. 293 

"(b) The strategic plan shall cover a period of not less than 
five years forward from the fiscal year in which it is submitted, 
and shall be updated and revised at least every three years. 

"(c) The performance plan required under section 2803 shall 
be consistent with the Postal Service's strategic plan. A performance 
plan may not be submitted for a fiscal year not covered by a 
current strategic plan under this section. 

"(d) When developing a strategic plan, the Postal Service shall 
solicit and consider the views and suggestions of those entities 
potentially affected by or interested in such a plan, and shall 
advise the Congress of the contents of the plan. 

"§ 2803. Performance plans 

"(a) The Postal Service shall prepare an annual performance 
plan covering each program activity set forth in the Postal Service 
budget, which shall be included in the comprehensive statement 
presented under section 2401(g) of this title. Such plan shall— 

"(1) establish performance goals to define the level of 
performance to be achieved by a program activity; 

"(2) express such goals in an objective, quantifiable, and 
measurable form unless an alternative form is used imder 
subsection (b); 

"(3) briefly describe the operational processes, skills and 
technology, and the human, capital, information, or other 
resources required to meet the performance goals; 

"(4) establish performance indicators to be used in measuring 
or assessing the relevant outputs, service levels, and outcomes 
of each program activity; 

"(5) provide a basis for comparing actual program results 
with the estabUshed performance goals; and 

"(6) describe the means to be used to verify and validate 
measured values. 
"(b) If the Postal Service determines that it is not feasible 

to express the performance goals for a particular program activity 
in an objective, quantifiable, and measurable form, the Postal Service 
may use an alternative form. Such alternative form shall— 

"(1) include separate descriptive statements of— 
"(A) a minimally effective program, and 
"(B) a successful program, 

with sufficient precision and in such terms that would allow 
for an accurate, independent determination of whether the program 
activity's performance meets the criteria of either description; 
or 

"(2) state why it is infeasible or impractical to express 
a performance goal in any form for the program activity. 
"(c) In preparing a comprehensive and irdformative plan imder 

this section, the Postal Service may aggregate, disaggregate, or 
consolidate program activities, except that any aggregation or 
consolidation may not omit or minimize the significance of any 
program activity constituting a major function or operation. 

"(d) The Postal Service may prepare a non-public annex to 
its plan covering program activities or parts of program activities 
relating to— 

"(1) the avoidance of interference with criminal prosecution; 
or 
"(2) matters otherwise exempt from public disclosure under 
section 410(c) of this title. 


107 STAT. 294 PUBLIC LAW 103-62—AUG. 3, 1993 

**§ 2804. Program performance reports 

"(a) The Postal Service shall prepare a report on program 
performance for each fiscal year, which shall be included in the 
annual comprehensive statement presented under section 2401(g) 
of this title. 

"(b)(1) The program performance report shall set forth the 
performance indicators established in the Postal Service performance 
plan, along with the actual program performance achieved 
compared with the performance goals expressed in the plan for 
that fiscal year. 

"(2) If performance goals are specified by descriptive statements 
of a minimally effective program activity and a successful program 
activity, the results of such program shall be described in relationship 
to those categories, including whether the performance failed 
to meet the criteria of either category. 

"(c) The report for fiscal year 2000 shall include actual results 
for the preceding fiscal year, the report for fiscal year 2001 shall 
include actual results for the two preceding fiscal years, and the 
report for fiscal year 2002 and all subsequent reports shall include 
actual results for the three preceding fiscal years. 

"(d) Each report shall— 
"(1) review the success of achieving the performance goals 
of the fiscal year; 

"(2) evaluate the performance plan for the current fiscal 
year relative to the performance achieved towards the performance 
goals in the fiscal year covered by the report; 

"(3) explain and describe, where a performance goal has 
not been met (including when a program activitjr's performance 
is determined not to have met the criteria of a successful 
program activity under section 2803(b)(2))— 

"(A) why the goal was not met; 
"(B) those plans and schedules for achieving the established 
performance goal; and 

"(C) if the performance goal is impractical or infeasible, 
why that is the case and what action is recommended; 
and 
"(4) include the summary findings of those program evalua


tions completed during the fiscal year covered by the report. 

^§ 2805. Inherently Governmental functions 

"The functions and activities of this chapter shall be considered 
to be inherently Grovemmental functions. The drafting of strategic 
plans, performance plans, £ind program performance reports under 
this section shall be performed only by employees of the Postal 
Service.". 

31 use 1115 SEC. 8. CONGRESSIONAL OVERSIGHT AND LEGISLATION. 

(a) IN GENERAL.—^Nothing in this Act shall be construed as 
limiting the ability of Congress to establish, amend, suspend, or 
annul a performance goal. Any such action shall have the effect 
of superseding that goal in the plan submitted under section 
1105(a)(29) of title 31, United States Code. 

PUBLIC LAW 103-62—AUG. 3, 1993 107 STAT. 295 

(b)GAO REPORT.—No later than June 1, 1997, the Comptroller 
General of the United States shall report to Congress on the 
implementation of this Act, including the prospects for compliance 
by Federal agencies beyond those participating as pilot projects 
under sections 1118 and 9704 of title 31, United States Code. 
SEC. 9. TRAINING. 31 USC 1115 

The Office of Personnel Management shall, in consultation 
with the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and 
the Comptroller Greneral of the United States, develop a strategic 
planning and performance measurement training component for 
its management training program and otherwise provide managers 
with an orientation on the development and use of strategic planning 
and program performance measurement. 

SEC. 10. APPLICATION OF ACT. 31 USC 1115 

No provision or amendment made by this Act may be construed "° ^' 
as— 

(1) creating any right, privilege, benefit, or entitlement 
for any person who is not an officer or employee of the United 
States acting in such capacity, and no person who is not an 
officer or employee of the United States acting in such capacity 
shall have standing to file any civil action in a court of the 
United States to enforce any provision or amendment made 
by this Act; or 
(2)superseding any statutory requirement, including any 
requirement under section 553 of title 5, United States Code. 
SEC. 11. TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS. 

(a) AMENDMENT TO TITLE 5, UNITED STATES CODE.—^The table 
of sections for chapter 3 of title 5, United States Code, is amended 
by adding after me item relating to section 305 the following: 
"306. Strategic plans.". 

(b) AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 31, UNITED STATES CODE.— 
(1) AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER ii.—The table of sections for 
chapter 11 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by 
adding after the item relating to section 1114 the following: 
"1115. Performance plans. 
"1116. Program performance reports. 
"1117. Exemptions. 
"1118. Pilot projects for performance goals. 
"1119. Pilot projects for performance budgeting.". 

(2) AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 97.—The table of sections for 
chapter 97 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by 
adding after the item relating to section 9702 the following: 
"9703. Managerial accountability and flexibility. 
"9704. Pilot projects for managerial accountability and flexibility.". 

69-194 O - 94 - 11 : QL. 3 Part 1 


107 STAT. 296 PUBLIC LAW 103-62—AUG. 3, 1993 

(c) AMENDMENT TO TITLE 39, UNITED STATES CODE.—The table 
of chapters for part III of title 39, United States Code, is amended 
by adding at the end thereof the following new item: 
'^8. Strategic planning and performance management 2801". 

Approved August 3, 1993. 

LEGISLATIVE HISTORY—S. 20 (H.R. 826): 

HOUSE REPORTS: No. 103-106, Pt. 1, accompanying H.R. 826 (Comm. on Government 

Operations). 
SENATE REPORTS: No. 103-58 (Comm. on Governmental Affairs). 
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD, Vol. 139 (1993): 

May 25, H.R. 826 considered and passed House. 

June 23, S. 20 considered and passed Senate. 

July 15, considered and passed House. 

WEEKLY COMPILATION OF PRESIDENTIAL DOCUMENTS, Vol. 29 (1993): 
Aug. 3, Presidential remarks. 


