PUBLIC LAW 111–352—JAN. 4, 2011 
(Document certified by Superintendent of Documents <pkisupport@gpo.gov>) Signed by Superintendent of Documents <pkisupport@gpo.gov> Time: 2012.03.20 20:39:26 Z Reason: GPO attests that this document has not been altered since it was disseminated by GPO Location: US GPO, Washington, DC 20401


GPRA MODERNIZATION ACT OF 2010 


124 STAT. 3866 PUBLIC LAW 111–352—JAN. 4, 2011 

Jan. 4, 2011 
[H.R. 2142] 

GPRA 
Modernization 
Act of 2010. 

31 USC 1101 
note. 

Deadline. 
Public 
information. 
Web posting. 
Notification. 

Public Law 111–352 
111th Congress 
An Act 

To require quarterly performance assessments of Government programs for purposes 
of assessing agency performance and improvement, and to establish agency performance 
improvement officers and the Performance Improvement Council. 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of 
the United States of America in Congress assembled, 

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS. 

(a) SHORT TITLE.—This Act may be cited as the ‘‘GPRA Modernization 
Act of 2010’’. 
(b) TABLE OF CONTENTS.—The table of contents for this Act 
is as follows: 
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents. 
Sec. 2. Strategic planning amendments.
Sec. 3. Performance planning amendments.
Sec. 4. Performance reporting amendments.
Sec. 5. Federal Government and agency priority goals.
Sec. 6. Quarterly priority progress reviews and use of performance information.
Sec. 7. Transparency of Federal Government programs, priority goals, and results.
Sec. 8. Agency Chief Operating Officers.
Sec. 9. Agency Performance Improvement Officers and the Performance Improve


ment Council. 
Sec. 10. Format of performance plans and reports.
Sec. 11. Reducing duplicative and outdated agency reporting.
Sec. 12. Performance management skills and competencies. 
Sec. 13. Technical and conforming amendments. 
Sec. 14. Implementation of this Act. 
Sec. 15. Congressional oversight and legislation. 

SEC. 2. STRATEGIC PLANNING AMENDMENTS. 

Chapter 3 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking 
section 306 and inserting the following: 

‘‘§ 306. Agency strategic plans 

‘‘(a) Not later than the first Monday in February of any year 
following the year in which the term of the President commences 
under section 101 of title 3, the head of each agency shall make 
available on the public website of the agency a strategic plan 
and notify the President and Congress of its availability. Such 
plan shall contain— 

‘‘(1) a comprehensive mission statement covering the major 
functions and operations of the agency; 

‘‘(2) general goals and objectives, including outcome-oriented 
goals, for the major functions and operations of the 
agency; 

‘‘(3) a description of how any goals and objectives contribute 
to the Federal Government priority goals required by section 
1120(a) of title 31; 


PUBLIC LAW 111–352—JAN. 4, 2011 124 STAT. 3867 

‘‘(4) a description of how the goals and objectives are to 
be achieved, including— 

‘‘(A) a description of the operational processes, skills 
and technology, and the human, capital, information, and 
other resources required to achieve those goals and objectives; 
and 

‘‘(B) a description of how the agency is working with 
other agencies to achieve its goals and objectives as well 
as relevant Federal Government priority goals; 
‘‘(5) a description of how the goals and objectives incor


porate views and suggestions obtained through congressional 
consultations required under subsection (d); 

‘‘(6) a description of how the performance goals provided 
in the plan required by section 1115(a) of title 31, including 
the agency priority goals required by section 1120(b) of title 
31, if applicable, contribute to the general goals and objectives 
in the strategic plan; 

‘‘(7) an identification of those key factors external to the 
agency and beyond its control that could significantly affect 
the achievement of the general goals and objectives; and 

‘‘(8) a description of the program evaluations used in establishing 
or revising general goals and objectives, with a schedule 
for future program evaluations to be conducted. 
‘‘(b) The strategic plan shall cover a period of not less than 

4 years following the fiscal year in which the plan is submitted. 
As needed, the head of the agency may make adjustments to the 
strategic plan to reflect significant changes in the environment 
in which the agency is operating, with appropriate notification 
of Congress. 

‘‘(c) The performance plan required by section 1115(b) of title 
31 shall be consistent with the agency’s strategic plan. A performance 
plan may not be submitted for a fiscal year not covered 
by a current strategic plan under this section. 

‘‘(d) When developing or making adjustments to a strategic Consultation. 
plan, the agency shall consult periodically with the Congress, 
including majority and minority views from the appropriate authorizing, 
appropriations, and oversight committees, and shall solicit 
and consider the views and suggestions of those entities potentially 
affected by or interested in such a plan. The agency shall consult 
with the appropriate committees of Congress at least once every 
2 years. 

‘‘(e) The functions and activities of this section shall be considered 
to be inherently governmental functions. The drafting of strategic 
plans under this section shall be performed only by Federal 
employees. 

‘‘(f) For purposes of this section the term ‘agency’ means an Definition. 
Executive agency defined under section 105, but does not include 
the Central Intelligence Agency, the Government Accountability 
Office, the United States Postal Service, and the Postal Regulatory 
Commission.’’. 

SEC. 3. PERFORMANCE PLANNING AMENDMENTS. 

Chapter 11 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by 
striking section 1115 and inserting the following: 


124 STAT. 3868 PUBLIC LAW 111–352—JAN. 4, 2011 

Coordination. 

Web posting. 

Deadline. 
Public 
information. 
Web posting. 
Notification. 

‘‘§ 1115. Federal Government and agency performance plans 

‘‘(a) FEDERAL GOVERNMENT PERFORMANCE PLANS.—In carrying 
out the provisions of section 1105(a)(28), the Director of the Office 
of Management and Budget shall coordinate with agencies to 
develop the Federal Government performance plan. In addition 
to the submission of such plan with each budget of the United 
States Government, the Director of the Office of Management and 
Budget shall ensure that all information required by this subsection 
is concurrently made available on the website provided under section 
1122 and updated periodically, but no less than annually. 
The Federal Government performance plan shall— 

‘‘(1) establish Federal Government performance goals to 
define the level of performance to be achieved during the year 
in which the plan is submitted and the next fiscal year for 
each of the Federal Government priority goals required under 
section 1120(a) of this title; 

‘‘(2) identify the agencies, organizations, program activities, 
regulations, tax expenditures, policies, and other activities 
contributing to each Federal Government performance goal 
during the current fiscal year; 

‘‘(3) for each Federal Government performance goal, identify 
a lead Government official who shall be responsible for 
coordinating the efforts to achieve the goal; 

‘‘(4) establish common Federal Government performance 
indicators with quarterly targets to be used in measuring or 
assessing— 

‘‘(A) overall progress toward each Federal Government 
performance goal; and 

‘‘(B) the individual contribution of each agency, 
organization, program activity, regulation, tax expenditure, 
policy, and other activity identified under paragraph (2); 
‘‘(5) establish clearly defined quarterly milestones; and 
‘‘(6) identify major management challenges that are 

Governmentwide or crosscutting in nature and describe plans 
to address such challenges, including relevant performance 
goals, performance indicators, and milestones. 
‘‘(b) AGENCY PERFORMANCE PLANS.—Not later than the first 

Monday in February of each year, the head of each agency shall 
make available on a public website of the agency, and notify the 
President and the Congress of its availability, a performance plan 
covering each program activity set forth in the budget of such 
agency. Such plan shall— 

‘‘(1) establish performance goals to define the level of 
performance to be achieved during the year in which the plan 
is submitted and the next fiscal year; 

‘‘(2) express such goals in an objective, quantifiable, and 
measurable form unless authorized to be in an alternative 
form under subsection (c); 

‘‘(3) describe how the performance goals contribute to— 

‘‘(A) the general goals and objectives established in 
the agency’s strategic plan required by section 306(a)(2) 
of title 5; and 

‘‘(B) any of the Federal Government performance goals 
established in the Federal Government performance plan 
required by subsection (a)(1); 


PUBLIC LAW 111–352—JAN. 4, 2011 124 STAT. 3869 

‘‘(4) identify among the performance goals those which 
are designated as agency priority goals as required by section 
1120(b) of this title, if applicable; 

‘‘(5) provide a description of how the performance goals 
are to be achieved, including— 

‘‘(A) the operation processes, training, skills and technology, 
and the human, capital, information, and other 
resources and strategies required to meet those performance 
goals; 

‘‘(B) clearly defined milestones; 

‘‘(C) an identification of the organizations, program 
activities, regulations, policies, and other activities that 
contribute to each performance goal, both within and 
external to the agency; 

‘‘(D) a description of how the agency is working with 
other agencies to achieve its performance goals as well 
as relevant Federal Government performance goals; and 

‘‘(E) an identification of the agency officials responsible 
for the achievement of each performance goal, who shall 
be known as goal leaders; 
‘‘(6) establish a balanced set of performance indicators to 

be used in measuring or assessing progress toward each 
performance goal, including, as appropriate, customer service, 
efficiency, output, and outcome indicators; 

‘‘(7) provide a basis for comparing actual program results 
with the established performance goals; 

‘‘(8) a description of how the agency will ensure the 
accuracy and reliability of the data used to measure progress 
towards its performance goals, including an identification of— 

‘‘(A) the means to be used to verify and validate meas


ured values; 
‘‘(B) the sources for the data; 
‘‘(C) the level of accuracy required for the intended 

use of the data; 
‘‘(D) any limitations to the data at the required level 
of accuracy; and 

‘‘(E) how the agency will compensate for such limitations 
if needed to reach the required level of accuracy; 
‘‘(9) describe major management challenges the agency 

faces and identify— 
‘‘(A) planned actions to address such challenges; 
‘‘(B) performance goals, performance indicators, and 

milestones to measure progress toward resolving such challenges; 
and 

‘‘(C) the agency official responsible for resolving such 
challenges; and 
‘‘(10) identify low-priority program activities based on an 

analysis of their contribution to the mission and goals of the 
agency and include an evidence-based justification for designating 
a program activity as low priority. 
‘‘(c) ALTERNATIVE FORM.—If an agency, in consultation with 

the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, determines 
that it is not feasible to express the performance goals for a particular 
program activity in an objective, quantifiable, and measurable 
form, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget 
may authorize an alternative form. Such alternative form shall— 

‘‘(1) include separate descriptive statements of— 


124 STAT. 3870 PUBLIC LAW 111–352—JAN. 4, 2011 

‘‘(A)(i) a minimally effective program; and 
‘‘(ii) a successful program; or 
‘‘(B) such alternative as authorized by the Director 

of the Office of Management and Budget, with sufficient 
precision and in such terms that would allow for an 
accurate, independent determination of whether the program 
activity’s performance meets the criteria of the 
description; or 
‘‘(2) state why it is infeasible or impractical to express 

a performance goal in any form for the program activity. 

‘‘(d) TREATMENT OF PROGRAM ACTIVITIES.—For the purpose of 
complying with this section, an agency may aggregate, disaggregate, 
or consolidate program activities, except that any aggregation or 
consolidation may not omit or minimize the significance of any 
program activity constituting a major function or operation for 
the agency. 

‘‘(e) APPENDIX.—An agency may submit with an annual 

performance plan an appendix covering any portion of the plan 

that— 

‘‘(1) is specifically authorized under criteria established 
by an Executive order to be kept secret in the interest of 
national defense or foreign policy; and 

‘‘(2) is properly classified pursuant to such Executive order. 

‘‘(f) INHERENTLY GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS.—The functions 
and activities of this section shall be considered to be inherently 
governmental functions. The drafting of performance plans under 
this section shall be performed only by Federal employees. 

‘‘(g) CHIEF HUMAN CAPITAL OFFICERS.—With respect to each 
agency with a Chief Human Capital Officer, the Chief Human 
Capital Officer shall prepare that portion of the annual performance 
plan described under subsection (b)(5)(A). 

‘‘(h) DEFINITIONS.—For purposes of this section and sections 
1116 through 1125, and sections 9703 and 9704, the term— 
‘‘(1) ‘agency’ has the same meaning as such term is defined 
under section 306(f) of title 5; 
‘‘(2) ‘crosscutting’ means across organizational (such as 
agency) boundaries; 

‘‘(3) ‘customer service measure’ means an assessment of 
service delivery to a customer, client, citizen, or other recipient, 
which can include an assessment of quality, timeliness, and 
satisfaction among other factors; 

‘‘(4) ‘efficiency measure’ means a ratio of a program 
activity’s inputs (such as costs or hours worked by employees) 
to its outputs (amount of products or services delivered) or 
outcomes (the desired results of a program); 

‘‘(5) ‘major management challenge’ means programs or 
management functions, within or across agencies, that have 
greater vulnerability to waste, fraud, abuse, and mismanagement 
(such as issues identified by the Government Accountability 
Office as high risk or issues identified by an Inspector 
General) where a failure to perform well could seriously affect 
the ability of an agency or the Government to achieve its 
mission or goals; 

‘‘(6) ‘milestone’ means a scheduled event signifying the 
completion of a major deliverable or a set of related deliverables 
or a phase of work; 


PUBLIC LAW 111–352—JAN. 4, 2011 124 STAT. 3871 

‘‘(7) ‘outcome measure’ means an assessment of the results 
of a program activity compared to its intended purpose; 

‘‘(8) ‘output measure’ means the tabulation, calculation, 
or recording of activity or effort that can be expressed in a 
quantitative or qualitative manner; 

‘‘(9) ‘performance goal’ means a target level of performance 
expressed as a tangible, measurable objective, against which 
actual achievement can be compared, including a goal expressed 
as a quantitative standard, value, or rate; 

‘‘(10) ‘performance indicator’ means a particular value or 
characteristic used to measure output or outcome; 

‘‘(11) ‘program activity’ means a specific activity or project 
as listed in the program and financing schedules of the annual 
budget of the United States Government; and 

‘‘(12) ‘program evaluation’ means an assessment, through 
objective measurement and systematic analysis, of the manner 
and extent to which Federal programs achieve intended objectives.’’. 


SEC. 4. PERFORMANCE REPORTING AMENDMENTS. 

Chapter 11 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by 
striking section 1116 and inserting the following: 

‘‘§ 1116. Agency performance reporting 

‘‘(a) The head of each agency shall make available on a public 
website of the agency and to the Office of Management and Budget 
an update on agency performance. 

‘‘(b)(1) Each update shall compare actual performance achieved 
with the performance goals established in the agency performance 
plan under section 1115(b) and shall occur no less than 150 days 
after the end of each fiscal year, with more frequent updates of 
actual performance on indicators that provide data of significant 
value to the Government, Congress, or program partners at a 
reasonable level of administrative burden. 

‘‘(2) If performance goals are specified in an alternative form 
under section 1115(c), the results shall be described in relation 
to such specifications, including whether the performance failed 
to meet the criteria of a minimally effective or successful program. 

‘‘(c) Each update shall— 
‘‘(1) review the success of achieving the performance goals 
and include actual results for the 5 preceding fiscal years; 

‘‘(2) evaluate the performance plan for the current fiscal 
year relative to the performance achieved toward the performance 
goals during the period covered by the update; 

‘‘(3) explain and describe where a performance goal has 
not been met (including when a program activity’s performance 
is determined not to have met the criteria of a successful 
program activity under section 1115(c)(1)(A)(ii) or a corresponding 
level of achievement if another alternative form 
is used)— 

‘‘(A) why the goal was not met; 
‘‘(B) those plans and schedules for achieving the established 
performance goal; and 
‘‘(C) if the performance goal is impractical or infeasible, 
why that is the case and what action is recommended; 

Public 
information. 
Web posting. 

Deadline. 


124 STAT. 3872 PUBLIC LAW 111–352—JAN. 4, 2011 

Classified 
information. 

Deadline. 
Determination. 

Designation. 

Submission. 

‘‘(4) describe the use and assess the effectiveness in 

achieving performance goals of any waiver under section 9703 

of this title; 

‘‘(5) include a review of the performance goals and evalua


tion of the performance plan relative to the agency’s strategic 

human capital management; 

‘‘(6) describe how the agency ensures the accuracy and 

reliability of the data used to measure progress towards its 

performance goals, including an identification of— 

‘‘(A) the means used to verify and validate measured 

values; 

‘‘(B) the sources for the data; 

‘‘(C) the level of accuracy required for the intended 

use of the data; 

‘‘(D) any limitations to the data at the required level 

of accuracy; and 

‘‘(E) how the agency has compensated for such limita


tions if needed to reach the required level of accuracy; 

and 

‘‘(7) include the summary findings of those program evalua


tions completed during the period covered by the update. 

‘‘(d) If an agency performance update includes any program 
activity or information that is specifically authorized under criteria 
established by an Executive Order to be kept secret in the interest 
of national defense or foreign policy and is properly classified pursuant 
to such Executive Order, the head of the agency shall make 
such information available in the classified appendix provided under 
section 1115(e). 

‘‘(e) The functions and activities of this section shall be considered 
to be inherently governmental functions. The drafting of agency 
performance updates under this section shall be performed only 
by Federal employees. 

‘‘(f) Each fiscal year, the Office of Management and Budget 
shall determine whether the agency programs or activities meet 
performance goals and objectives outlined in the agency performance 
plans and submit a report on unmet goals to— 

‘‘(1) the head of the agency; 

‘‘(2) the Committee on Homeland Security and Govern


mental Affairs of the Senate; 

‘‘(3) the Committee on Oversight and Governmental Reform 

of the House of Representatives; and 

‘‘(4) the Government Accountability Office. 

‘‘(g) If an agency’s programs or activities have not met performance 
goals as determined by the Office of Management and Budget 
for 1 fiscal year, the head of the agency shall submit a performance 
improvement plan to the Office of Management and Budget to 
increase program effectiveness for each unmet goal with measurable 
milestones. The agency shall designate a senior official who shall 
oversee the performance improvement strategies for each unmet 
goal. 

‘‘(h)(1) If the Office of Management and Budget determines 
that agency programs or activities have unmet performance goals 
for 2 consecutive fiscal years, the head of the agency shall— 

‘‘(A) submit to Congress a description of the actions the 

Administration will take to improve performance, including 

proposed statutory changes or planned executive actions; and 


PUBLIC LAW 111–352—JAN. 4, 2011 124 STAT. 3873 

‘‘(B) describe any additional funding the agency will obligate 
to achieve the goal, if such an action is determined appropriate 
in consultation with the Director of the Office of Management 
and Budget, for an amount determined appropriate by 
the Director. 
‘‘(2) In providing additional funding described under paragraph 

(1)(B), the head of the agency shall use any reprogramming or 
transfer authority available to the agency. If after exercising such 
authority additional funding is necessary to achieve the level determined 
appropriate by the Director of the Office of Management 
and Budget, the head of the agency shall submit a request to 
Congress for additional reprogramming or transfer authority. 

‘‘(i) If an agency’s programs or activities have not met performance 
goals as determined by the Office of Management and Budget 
for 3 consecutive fiscal years, the Director of the Office of Management 
and Budget shall submit recommendations to Congress on 
actions to improve performance not later than 60 days after that 
determination, including— 

‘‘(1) reauthorization proposals for each program or activity 
that has not met performance goals; 

‘‘(2) proposed statutory changes necessary for the program 
activities to achieve the proposed level of performance on each 
performance goal; and 

‘‘(3) planned executive actions or identification of the program 
for termination or reduction in the President’s budget.’’. 

SEC. 5. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND AGENCY PRIORITY GOALS. 

Chapter 11 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by 
adding after section 1119 the following: 

‘‘§ 1120. Federal Government and agency priority goals 

‘‘(a) FEDERAL GOVERNMENT PRIORITY GOALS.— 

‘‘(1) The Director of the Office of Management and Budget 
shall coordinate with agencies to develop priority goals to 
improve the performance and management of the Federal 
Government. Such Federal Government priority goals shall 
include— 

‘‘(A) outcome-oriented goals covering a limited number 
of crosscutting policy areas; and 
‘‘(B) goals for management improvements needed 

across the Federal Government, including— 
‘‘(i) financial management; 
‘‘(ii) human capital management; 
‘‘(iii) information technology management; 
‘‘(iv) procurement and acquisition management; 

and 
‘‘(v) real property management; 

‘‘(2) The Federal Government priority goals shall be long-
term in nature. At a minimum, the Federal Government priority 
goals shall be updated or revised every 4 years and made 
publicly available concurrently with the submission of the 
budget of the United States Government made in the first 
full fiscal year following any year in which the term of the 
President commences under section 101 of title 3. As needed, 
the Director of the Office of Management and Budget may 
make adjustments to the Federal Government priority goals 
to reflect significant changes in the environment in which the 

Request. 

Recommenda-
tions. 
Deadline. 

Deadline. 
Public 
information. 


124 STAT. 3874 

Consultation. 

Consultation. 
Deadline. 

Web posting. 

Deadline. 

Determination. 

Time period. 

Classified 
information. 

PUBLIC LAW 111–352—JAN. 4, 2011 

Federal Government is operating, with appropriate notification 
of Congress. 

‘‘(3) When developing or making adjustments to Federal 
Government priority goals, the Director of the Office of Management 
and Budget shall consult periodically with the Congress, 
including obtaining majority and minority views from— 

‘‘(A) the Committees on Appropriations of the Senate 
and the House of Representatives; 
‘‘(B) the Committees on the Budget of the Senate and 
the House of Representatives; 
‘‘(C) the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental 
Affairs of the Senate; 
‘‘(D) the Committee on Oversight and Government 

Reform of the House of Representatives; 
‘‘(E) the Committee on Finance of the Senate; 
‘‘(F) the Committee on Ways and Means of the House 

of Representatives; and 
‘‘(G) any other committees as determined appropriate; 

‘‘(4) The Director of the Office of Management and Budget 
shall consult with the appropriate committees of Congress at 
least once every 2 years. 

‘‘(5) The Director of the Office of Management and Budget 
shall make information about the Federal Government priority 
goals available on the website described under section 1122 
of this title. 

‘‘(6) The Federal Government performance plan required 
under section 1115(a) of this title shall be consistent with 
the Federal Government priority goals. 
‘‘(b) AGENCY PRIORITY GOALS.— 

‘‘(1) Every 2 years, the head of each agency listed in section 
901(b) of this title, or as otherwise determined by the Director 
of the Office of Management and Budget, shall identify agency 
priority goals from among the performance goals of the agency. 
The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall 
determine the total number of agency priority goals across 
the Government, and the number to be developed by each 
agency. The agency priority goals shall— 

‘‘(A) reflect the highest priorities of the agency, as 
determined by the head of the agency and informed by 
the Federal Government priority goals provided under subsection 
(a) and the consultations with Congress and other 
interested parties required by section 306(d) of title 5; 

‘‘(B) have ambitious targets that can be achieved within 
a 2-year period; 

‘‘(C) have a clearly identified agency official, known 
as a goal leader, who is responsible for the achievement 
of each agency priority goal; 

‘‘(D) have interim quarterly targets for performance 
indicators if more frequent updates of actual performance 
provides data of significant value to the Government, Congress, 
or program partners at a reasonable level of administrative 
burden; and 

‘‘(E) have clearly defined quarterly milestones. 

‘‘(2) If an agency priority goal includes any program activity 
or information that is specifically authorized under criteria 
established by an Executive order to be kept secret in the 
interest of national defense or foreign policy and is properly 


PUBLIC LAW 111–352—JAN. 4, 2011 124 STAT. 3875 

classified pursuant to such Executive order, the head of the 
agency shall make such information available in the classified 
appendix provided under section 1115(e). 
‘‘(c) The functions and activities of this section shall be consid


ered to be inherently governmental functions. The development 
of Federal Government and agency priority goals shall be performed 
only by Federal employees.’’. 

SEC. 6. QUARTERLY PRIORITY PROGRESS REVIEWS AND USE OF 
PERFORMANCE INFORMATION. 

Chapter 11 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by 
adding after section 1120 (as added by section 5 of this Act) the 
following: 

‘‘§ 1121. Quarterly priority progress reviews and use of 
performance information 

‘‘(a) USE OF PERFORMANCE INFORMATION TO ACHIEVE FEDERAL 
GOVERNMENT PRIORITY GOALS.—Not less than quarterly, the 
Director of the Office of Management and Budget, with the support 
of the Performance Improvement Council, shall— 

‘‘(1) for each Federal Government priority goal required 
by section 1120(a) of this title, review with the appropriate 
lead Government official the progress achieved during the most 
recent quarter, overall trend data, and the likelihood of meeting 
the planned level of performance; 

‘‘(2) include in such reviews officials from the agencies, 
organizations, and program activities that contribute to the 
accomplishment of each Federal Government priority goal; 

‘‘(3) assess whether agencies, organizations, program activi-Assessment. 
ties, regulations, tax expenditures, policies, and other activities 
are contributing as planned to each Federal Government priority 
goal; 

‘‘(4) categorize the Federal Government priority goals by 
risk of not achieving the planned level of performance; and 

‘‘(5) for the Federal Government priority goals at greatest 
risk of not meeting the planned level of performance, identify 
prospects and strategies for performance improvement, 
including any needed changes to agencies, organizations, program 
activities, regulations, tax expenditures, policies or other 
activities. 
‘‘(b) AGENCY USE OF PERFORMANCE INFORMATION TO ACHIEVE 

AGENCY PRIORITY GOALS.—Not less than quarterly, at each agency 
required to develop agency priority goals required by section 1120(b) 
of this title, the head of the agency and Chief Operating Officer, 
with the support of the agency Performance Improvement Officer, 
shall— 

‘‘(1) for each agency priority goal, review with the appropriate 
goal leader the progress achieved during the most recent 
quarter, overall trend data, and the likelihood of meeting the 
planned level of performance; 

‘‘(2) coordinate with relevant personnel within and outside 
the agency who contribute to the accomplishment of each 
agency priority goal; 

‘‘(3) assess whether relevant organizations, program activi-Assessment. 
ties, regulations, policies, and other activities are contributing 
as planned to the agency priority goals; 


124 STAT. 3876 PUBLIC LAW 111–352—JAN. 4, 2011 

Deadline. 

‘‘(4) categorize agency priority goals by risk of not achieving 
the planned level of performance; and 

‘‘(5) for agency priority goals at greatest risk of not meeting 
the planned level of performance, identify prospects and strategies 
for performance improvement, including any needed 
changes to agency program activities, regulations, policies, or 
other activities.’’. 

SEC. 7. TRANSPARENCY OF FEDERAL GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS, PRIORITY 
GOALS, AND RESULTS. 

Chapter 11 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by 
adding after section 1121 (as added by section 6 of this Act) the 
following: 

‘‘§ 1122. Transparency of programs, priority goals, and results 

‘‘(a) TRANSPARENCY OF AGENCY PROGRAMS.— 
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than October 1, 2012, the 

Office of Management and Budget shall— 
‘‘(A) ensure the effective operation of a single website; 
‘‘(B) at a minimum, update the website on a quarterly 

basis; and 

‘‘(C) include on the website information about each 
program identified by the agencies. 
‘‘(2) INFORMATION.—Information for each program described 

under paragraph (1) shall include— 

‘‘(A) an identification of how the agency defines the 
term ‘program’, consistent with guidance provided by the 
Director of the Office of Management and Budget, including 
the program activities that are aggregated, disaggregated, 
or consolidated to be considered a program by the agency; 

‘‘(B) a description of the purposes of the program and 
the contribution of the program to the mission and goals 
of the agency; and 

‘‘(C) an identification of funding for the current fiscal 
year and previous 2 fiscal years. 

‘‘(b) TRANSPARENCY OF AGENCY PRIORITY GOALS AND 
RESULTS.—The head of each agency required to develop agency 
priority goals shall make information about each agency priority 
goal available to the Office of Management and Budget for publication 
on the website, with the exception of any information covered 
by section 1120(b)(2) of this title. In addition to an identification 
of each agency priority goal, the website shall also consolidate 
information about each agency priority goal, including— 

‘‘(1) a description of how the agency incorporated any views 
and suggestions obtained through congressional consultations 
about the agency priority goal; 

‘‘(2) an identification of key factors external to the agency 
and beyond its control that could significantly affect the 
achievement of the agency priority goal; 

‘‘(3) a description of how each agency priority goal will 
be achieved, including— 
‘‘(A) the strategies and resources required to meet the 

priority goal; 
‘‘(B) clearly defined milestones; 
‘‘(C) the organizations, program activities, regulations, 

policies, and other activities that contribute to each goal, 
both within and external to the agency; 


PUBLIC LAW 111–352—JAN. 4, 2011 124 STAT. 3877 

‘‘(D) how the agency is working with other agencies 
to achieve the goal; and 

‘‘(E) an identification of the agency official responsible 
for achieving the priority goal; 
‘‘(4) the performance indicators to be used in measuring 

or assessing progress; 

‘‘(5) a description of how the agency ensures the accuracy 
and reliability of the data used to measure progress towards 
the priority goal, including an identification of— 

‘‘(A) the means used to verify and validate measured 

values; 
‘‘(B) the sources for the data; 
‘‘(C) the level of accuracy required for the intended 

use of the data; 
‘‘(D) any limitations to the data at the required level 
of accuracy; and 

‘‘(E) how the agency has compensated for such limitations 
if needed to reach the required level of accuracy; 
‘‘(6) the results achieved during the most recent quarter 

and overall trend data compared to the planned level of 
performance; 

‘‘(7) an assessment of whether relevant organizations, program 
activities, regulations, policies, and other activities are 
contributing as planned; 

‘‘(8) an identification of the agency priority goals at risk 
of not achieving the planned level of performance; and 

‘‘(9) any prospects or strategies for performance improvement. 
‘‘(c) TRANSPARENCY OF FEDERAL GOVERNMENT PRIORITY GOALS 

AND RESULTS.—The Director of the Office of Management and Web posting. 
Budget shall also make available on the website— 
‘‘(1) a brief description of each of the Federal Government 
priority goals required by section 1120(a) of this title; 

‘‘(2) a description of how the Federal Government priority 
goals incorporate views and suggestions obtained through 
congressional consultations; 

‘‘(3) the Federal Government performance goals and 
performance indicators associated with each Federal Government 
priority goal as required by section 1115(a) of this title; 

‘‘(4) an identification of the lead Government official for 
each Federal Government performance goal; 

‘‘(5) the results achieved during the most recent quarter 
and overall trend data compared to the planned level of 
performance; 

‘‘(6) an identification of the agencies, organizations, program 
activities, regulations, tax expenditures, policies, and 
other activities that contribute to each Federal Government 
priority goal; 

‘‘(7) an assessment of whether relevant agencies, organiza-Assessment. 
tions, program activities, regulations, tax expenditures, policies, 
and other activities are contributing as planned; 

‘‘(8) an identification of the Federal Government priority 
goals at risk of not achieving the planned level of performance; 
and 

‘‘(9) any prospects or strategies for performance improvement. 



124 STAT. 3878 PUBLIC LAW 111–352—JAN. 4, 2011 

Public 
information. 

Guidance. 

‘‘(d) INFORMATION ON WEBSITE.—The information made available 
on the website under this section shall be readily accessible 
and easily found on the Internet by the public and members and 
committees of Congress. Such information shall also be presented 
in a searchable, machine-readable format. The Director of the Office 
of Management and Budget shall issue guidance to ensure that 
such information is provided in a way that presents a coherent 
picture of all Federal programs, and the performance of the Federal 
Government as well as individual agencies.’’. 

SEC. 8. AGENCY CHIEF OPERATING OFFICERS. 

Chapter 11 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by 
adding after section 1122 (as added by section 7 of this Act) the 
following: 

‘‘§ 1123. Chief Operating Officers 

‘‘(a) ESTABLISHMENT.—At each agency, the deputy head of 
agency, or equivalent, shall be the Chief Operating Officer of the 
agency. 

‘‘(b) FUNCTION.—Each Chief Operating Officer shall be responsible 
for improving the management and performance of the agency, 
and shall— 

‘‘(1) provide overall organization management to improve 
agency performance and achieve the mission and goals of the 
agency through the use of strategic and performance planning, 
measurement, analysis, regular assessment of progress, and 
use of performance information to improve the results achieved; 

‘‘(2) advise and assist the head of agency in carrying out 
the requirements of sections 1115 through 1122 of this title 
and section 306 of title 5; 

‘‘(3) oversee agency-specific efforts to improve management 
functions within the agency and across Government; and 

‘‘(4) coordinate and collaborate with relevant personnel 
within and external to the agency who have a significant role 
in contributing to and achieving the mission and goals of the 
agency, such as the Chief Financial Officer, Chief Human Capital 
Officer, Chief Acquisition Officer/Senior Procurement 
Executive, Chief Information Officer, and other line of business 
chiefs at the agency.’’. 

SEC. 9. AGENCY PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT OFFICERS AND THE 
PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT COUNCIL. 

Chapter 11 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by 
adding after section 1123 (as added by section 8 of this Act) the 
following: 

‘‘§ 1124. Performance Improvement Officers and the Performance 
Improvement Council 

‘‘(a) PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT OFFICERS.— 

‘‘(1) ESTABLISHMENT.—At each agency, the head of the 
agency, in consultation with the agency Chief Operating Officer, 
shall designate a senior executive of the agency as the agency 
Performance Improvement Officer. 

‘‘(2) FUNCTION.—Each Performance Improvement Officer 
shall report directly to the Chief Operating Officer. Subject 
to the direction of the Chief Operating Officer, each Performance 
Improvement Officer shall— 


PUBLIC LAW 111–352—JAN. 4, 2011 124 STAT. 3879 

‘‘(A) advise and assist the head of the agency and 
the Chief Operating Officer to ensure that the mission 
and goals of the agency are achieved through strategic 
and performance planning, measurement, analysis, regular 
assessment of progress, and use of performance information 
to improve the results achieved; 

‘‘(B) advise the head of the agency and the Chief Operating 
Officer on the selection of agency goals, including 
opportunities to collaborate with other agencies on common 
goals; 

‘‘(C) assist the head of the agency and the Chief Operating 
Officer in overseeing the implementation of the 
agency strategic planning, performance planning, and 
reporting requirements provided under sections 1115 
through 1122 of this title and sections 306 of title 5, 
including the contributions of the agency to the Federal 
Government priority goals; 

‘‘(D) support the head of agency and the Chief Operating 
Officer in the conduct of regular reviews of agency 
performance, including at least quarterly reviews of 
progress achieved toward agency priority goals, if 
applicable; 

‘‘(E) assist the head of the agency and the Chief Operating 
Officer in the development and use within the agency 
of performance measures in personnel performance 
appraisals, and, as appropriate, other agency personnel 
and planning processes and assessments; and 

‘‘(F) ensure that agency progress toward the achievement 
of all goals is communicated to leaders, managers, 
and employees in the agency and Congress, and made 
available on a public website of the agency. 

‘‘(b) PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT COUNCIL.— 
‘‘(1) ESTABLISHMENT.—There is established a Performance 

Improvement Council, consisting of— 
‘‘(A) the Deputy Director for Management of the Office 
of Management and Budget, who shall act as chairperson 
of the Council; 
‘‘(B) the Performance Improvement Officer from each 
agency defined in section 901(b) of this title; 
‘‘(C) other Performance Improvement Officers as determined 
appropriate by the chairperson; and 
‘‘(D) other individuals as determined appropriate by 
the chairperson. 
‘‘(2) FUNCTION.—The Performance Improvement Council 

shall— 
‘‘(A) be convened by the chairperson or the designee 
of the chairperson, who shall preside at the meetings of 
the Performance Improvement Council, determine its 
agenda, direct its work, and establish and direct subgroups 
of the Performance Improvement Council, as appropriate, 
to deal with particular subject matters; 
‘‘(B) assist the Director of the Office of Management 
and Budget to improve the performance of the Federal 
Government and achieve the Federal Government priority 
goals; 
‘‘(C) assist the Director of the Office of Management 
and Budget in implementing the planning, reporting, and 

Public 
information. 
Web posting. 


124 STAT. 3880 PUBLIC LAW 111–352—JAN. 4, 2011 

31 USC 1115 
note. 

Web posting. 
Guidance. 

use of performance information requirements related to 
the Federal Government priority goals provided under sections 
1115, 1120, 1121, and 1122 of this title; 

‘‘(D) work to resolve specific Governmentwide or crosscutting 
performance issues, as necessary; 

‘‘(E) facilitate the exchange among agencies of practices 
that have led to performance improvements within specific 
programs, agencies, or across agencies; 

‘‘(F) coordinate with other interagency management 
councils; 

‘‘(G) seek advice and information as appropriate from 
nonmember agencies, particularly smaller agencies; 

‘‘(H) consider the performance improvement experiences 
of corporations, nonprofit organizations, foreign, 
State, and local governments, Government employees, 
public sector unions, and customers of Government services; 


‘‘(I) receive such assistance, information and advice 
from agencies as the Council may request, which agencies 
shall provide to the extent permitted by law; and 

‘‘(J) develop and submit to the Director of the Office 
of Management and Budget, or when appropriate to the 
President through the Director of the Office of Management 
and Budget, at times and in such formats as the chairperson 
may specify, recommendations to streamline and 
improve performance management policies and requirements. 
‘‘(3) SUPPORT.— 

‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—The Administrator of General Services 
shall provide administrative and other support for 
the Council to implement this section. 

‘‘(B) PERSONNEL.—The heads of agencies with Performance 
Improvement Officers serving on the Council shall, 
as appropriate and to the extent permitted by law, provide 
at the request of the chairperson of the Performance 
Improvement Council up to 2 personnel authorizations to 
serve at the direction of the chairperson.’’. 

SEC. 10. FORMAT OF PERFORMANCE PLANS AND REPORTS. 

(a) SEARCHABLE, MACHINE-READABLE PLANS AND REPORTS.— 
For fiscal year 2012 and each fiscal year thereafter, each agency 
required to produce strategic plans, performance plans, and 
performance updates in accordance with the amendments made 
by this Act shall— 
(1) not incur expenses for the printing of strategic plans, 
performance plans, and performance reports for release external 
to the agency, except when providing such documents to the 
Congress; 
(2) produce such plans and reports in searchable, machine-
readable formats; and 
(3) make such plans and reports available on the website 
described under section 1122 of title 31, United States Code. 
(b) WEB-BASED PERFORMANCE PLANNING AND REPORTING.— 
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than June 1, 2012, the Director 
of the Office of Management and Budget shall issue guidance 
to agencies to provide concise and timely performance information 
for publication on the website described under section 

PUBLIC LAW 111–352—JAN. 4, 2011 124 STAT. 3881 

1122 of title 31, United States Code, including, at a minimum, 
all requirements of sections 1115 and 1116 of title 31, United 
States Code, except for section 1115(e). 

(2) HIGH-PRIORITY GOALS.—For agencies required to develop 
agency priority goals under section 1120(b) of title 31, United 
States Code, the performance information required under this 
section shall be merged with the existing information required 
under section 1122 of title 31, United States Code. 
(3) CONSIDERATIONS.—In developing guidance under this 
subsection, the Director of the Office of Management and 
Budget shall take into consideration the experiences of agencies 
in making consolidated performance planning and reporting 
information available on the website as required under section 
1122 of title 31, United States Code. 
SEC. 11. REDUCING DUPLICATIVE AND OUTDATED AGENCY 
REPORTING. 

(a) BUDGET CONTENTS.—Section 1105(a) of title 31, United 
States Code, is amended— 
(1) by redesignating second paragraph (33) as paragraph 
(35); and 
(2) by adding at the end the following: 
‘‘(37) the list of plans and reports, as provided for under 
section 1125, that agencies identified for elimination or consolidation 
because the plans and reports are determined outdated 
or duplicative of other required plans and reports.’’. 

(b) ELIMINATION OF UNNECESSARY AGENCY REPORTING.— 
Chapter 11 of title 31, United States Code, is further amended 
by adding after section 1124 (as added by section 9 of this Act) 
the following: 
‘‘§ 1125. Elimination of unnecessary agency reporting 

‘‘(a) AGENCY IDENTIFICATION OF UNNECESSARY REPORTS.— 
Annually, based on guidance provided by the Director of the Office 
of Management and Budget, the Chief Operating Officer at each 
agency shall— 

‘‘(1) compile a list that identifies all plans and reports 
the agency produces for Congress, in accordance with statutory 
requirements or as directed in congressional reports; 

‘‘(2) analyze the list compiled under paragraph (1), identify 
which plans and reports are outdated or duplicative of other 
required plans and reports, and refine the list to include only 
the plans and reports identified to be outdated or duplicative; 

‘‘(3) consult with the congressional committees that receive 
the plans and reports identified under paragraph (2) to determine 
whether those plans and reports are no longer useful 
to the committees and could be eliminated or consolidated 
with other plans and reports; and 

‘‘(4) provide a total count of plans and reports compiled 
under paragraph (1) and the list of outdated and duplicative 
reports identified under paragraph (2) to the Director of the 
Office of Management and Budget. 
‘‘(b) PLANS AND REPORTS.— 

‘‘(1) FIRST YEAR.—During the first year of implementation 
of this section, the list of plans and reports identified by each 
agency as outdated or duplicative shall be not less than 10 


124 STAT. 3882 PUBLIC LAW 111–352—JAN. 4, 2011 

Determination. 

Deadlines. 
5 USC 5105 note. 

percent of all plans and reports identified under subsection 
(a)(1). 

‘‘(2) SUBSEQUENT YEARS.—In each year following the first 
year described under paragraph (1), the Director of the Office 
of Management and Budget shall determine the minimum percent 
of plans and reports to be identified as outdated or duplicative 
on each list of plans and reports. 
‘‘(c) REQUEST FOR ELIMINATION OF UNNECESSARY REPORTS.— 

In addition to including the list of plans and reports determined 
to be outdated or duplicative by each agency in the budget of 
the United States Government, as provided by section 1105(a)(37), 
the Director of the Office of Management and Budget may concurrently 
submit to Congress legislation to eliminate or consolidate 
such plans and reports.’’. 

SEC. 12. PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT SKILLS AND COMPETENCIES. 

(a) PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT SKILLS AND COMPETENCIES.— 
Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the Director of the Office of Personnel Management, in consultation 
with the Performance Improvement Council, shall identify the key 
skills and competencies needed by Federal Government personnel 
for developing goals, evaluating programs, and analyzing and using 
performance information for the purpose of improving Government 
efficiency and effectiveness. 
(b) POSITION CLASSIFICATIONS.—Not later than 2 years after 
the date of enactment of this Act, based on the identifications 
under subsection (a), the Director of the Office of Personnel Management 
shall incorporate, as appropriate, such key skills and competencies 
into relevant position classifications. 
(c) INCORPORATION INTO EXISTING AGENCY TRAINING.—Not later 
than 2 years after the enactment of this Act, the Director of the 
Office of Personnel Management shall work with each agency, as 
defined under section 306(f) of title 5, United States Code, to 
incorporate the key skills identified under subsection (a) into 
training for relevant employees at each agency. 
SEC. 13. TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS. 

(a) The table of contents for chapter 3 of title 5, United States 
Code, is amended by striking the item relating to section 306 
and inserting the following: 
‘‘306. Agency strategic plans.’’. 

(b) The table of contents for chapter 11 of title 31, United 
States Code, is amended by striking the items relating to section 
1115 and 1116 and inserting the following: 
‘‘1115. Federal Government and agency performance plans. 
‘‘1116. Agency performance reporting.’’. 

(c) The table of contents for chapter 11 of title 31, United 
States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: 
‘‘1120. Federal Government and agency priority goals. 
‘‘1121. Quarterly priority progress reviews and use of performance information. 
‘‘1122. Transparency of programs, priority goals, and results. 
‘‘1123. Chief Operating Officers. 
‘‘1124. Performance Improvement Officers and the Performance Improvement Coun


cil. 
‘‘1125. Elimination of unnecessary agency reporting.’’. 


PUBLIC LAW 111–352—JAN. 4, 2011 124 STAT. 3883 

SEC. 14. IMPLEMENTATION OF THIS ACT. 

(a) INTERIM PLANNING AND REPORTING.— 
(1) IN GENERAL.—The Director of the Office of Management 
and Budget shall coordinate with agencies to develop interim 
Federal Government priority goals and submit interim Federal 
Government performance plans consistent with the requirements 
of this Act beginning with the submission of the fiscal 
year 2013 Budget of the United States Government. 
(2) REQUIREMENTS.—Each agency shall— 
(A) not later than February 6, 2012, make adjustments 
to its strategic plan to make the plan consistent with 
the requirements of this Act; 
(B) prepare and submit performance plans consistent 
with the requirements of this Act, including the identification 
of agency priority goals, beginning with the performance 
plan for fiscal year 2013; and 
(C) make performance reporting updates consistent 
with the requirements of this Act beginning in fiscal year 
2012. 
(3) QUARTERLY REVIEWS.—The quarterly priority progress 
reviews required under this Act shall begin— 
(A) with the first full quarter beginning on or after 
the date of enactment of this Act for agencies based on 
the agency priority goals contained in the Analytical 
Perspectives volume of the Fiscal Year 2011 Budget of 
the United States Government; and 
(B) with the quarter ending June 30, 2012 for the 
interim Federal Government priority goals. 
(b) GUIDANCE.—The Director of the Office of Management and 
Budget shall prepare guidance for agencies in carrying out the 
interim planning and reporting activities required under subsection 
(a), in addition to other guidance as required for implementation 
of this Act. 
SEC. 15. CONGRESSIONAL OVERSIGHT AND LEGISLATION. 

(a) IN GENERAL.—Nothing in this Act shall be construed as 
limiting the ability of Congress to establish, amend, suspend, or 
annul a goal of the Federal Government or an agency. 
(b) GAO REVIEWS.— 
(1) INTERIM PLANNING AND REPORTING EVALUATION.—Not 
later than June 30, 2013, the Comptroller General shall submit 
a report to Congress that includes— 
(A) an evaluation of the implementation of the interim 
planning and reporting activities conducted under section 
14 of this Act; and 
(B) any recommendations for improving implementation 
of this Act as determined appropriate. 
(2) IMPLEMENTATION EVALUATIONS.— 
(A) IN GENERAL.—The Comptroller General shall 
evaluate the implementation of this Act subsequent to the 
interim planning and reporting activities evaluated in the 
report submitted to Congress under paragraph (1). 
(B) AGENCY IMPLEMENTATION.— 
(i) EVALUATIONS.—The Comptroller General shall 
evaluate how implementation of this Act is affecting 
performance management at the agencies described 
in section 901(b) of title 31, United States Code, 
31 USC 1115 
note. 

Coordination. 

Deadline. 

Plan. 

31 USC 1115 
note. 


124 STAT. 3884 PUBLIC LAW 111–352—JAN. 4, 2011 

including whether performance management is being 
used by those agencies to improve the efficiency and 
effectiveness of agency programs. 

(ii) REPORTS.—The Comptroller General shall 
submit to Congress— 
(I) an initial report on the evaluation under 
clause (i), not later than September 30, 2015; and 
(II) a subsequent report on the evaluation 
under clause (i), not later than September 30, 
2017. 
(C) FEDERAL GOVERNMENT PLANNING AND REPORTING 
IMPLEMENTATION.— 
(i) EVALUATIONS.—The Comptroller General shall 
evaluate the implementation of the Federal Government 
priority goals, Federal Government performance 
plans and related reporting required by this Act. 
(ii) REPORTS.—The Comptroller General shall 
submit to Congress— 
(I) an initial report on the evaluation under 
clause (i), not later than September 30, 2015; and 
(II) subsequent reports on the evaluation 
under clause (i), not later than September 30, 2017 
and every 4 years thereafter. 
(D) RECOMMENDATIONS.—The Comptroller General 
shall include in the reports required by subparagraphs 
(B) and (C) any recommendations for improving 
implementation of this Act and for streamlining the planning 
and reporting requirements of the Government 
Performance and Results Act of 1993. 
Approved January 4, 2011. 

LEGISLATIVE HISTORY—H.R. 2142: 

HOUSE REPORTS: No. 111–504 (Comm. on Oversight and Government Reform). 
SENATE REPORTS: No. 111–372 (Comm. on Homeland Security and Governmental 
Affairs). 

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD, Vol. 156 (2010): 
June 16, considered and passed House. 
Dec. 16, considered and passed Senate, amended. 
Dec. 17, House failed to concur in Senate amendment. 
Dec. 21, House concurred in Senate amendment. 

Æ 


