SECTION 120—APPORTIONMENT PROCESS 

 

Table of Contents 

 

Introduction to Apportionments 

120.1 What is an apportionment? 

120.2 What terms and concepts should I understand to work with apportionments? 

120.3 Are apportionments made at the Treasury appropriation fund symbol (TAFS) level? 

120.4 What TAFSs are required to be apportioned? 

120.5 What TAFSs are exempt from apportionment? 

120.6 Can a portion of my TAFS be exempt from apportionment? 

120.7 Do I need to submit an apportionment every fiscal year for TAFSs that are multi-year/no-
year? 

120.8 Can I incur obligations without an apportionment? 

120.9 Can I use an apportionment to resolve legal issues about the availability of funds? 

 

What is in an Apportionment? 

120.10 How is the apportionment organized? 

120.11 Why is the Budgetary Resources section needed? 

120.12 After OMB approves an apportionment, can I obligate against all budgetary resources? 

120.13 What is the format of the Applications of Budgetary Resources section and what categories 
does OMB use to apportion funds? 

120.14 What is the format of the Guaranteed Loan Levels and Applications section? 

120.15 What other kinds of information may an apportionment include? 

 

Preparing the Apportionment Request 

120.16 How can I submit an apportionment request? 

120.17 Is there a standard, set number of lines to show in an apportionment request? 

120.18 What header information at the top of the apportionment must I complete? 

120.19 What do I put in each column of the apportionment request? 

120.20 Do I need to follow special conventions to show the portion of discretionary balances in 
split accounts (TAFSs with both mandatory and discretionary funds)? 

120.21 Can I use amounts that include decimal points or cents in an apportionment? 

120.22 Should I use a specific numeric format in the Excel file that holds my request? 

120.23 When are apportionments due at OMB for a new fiscal year? 

120.24 When is the apportionment system open for a new fiscal year? 

120.25 Can I combine TAFSs on a single apportionment? 

120.26 Should I assemble apportionment requests for multiple TAFSs in a single package or file? 

120.27 Can I cross-check information in the Budgetary Resources section? 

120.28 Who can approve the apportionment request for the agency? 

120.29 Who is responsible for preparing the apportionment request for allocation (parent/child) 
accounts? 

 

Submitting Apportionment Requests 

120.30 How do I submit apportionment requests to OMB? 

120.31 What functions will I perform using the apportionment system? 

120.32 How do I gain access to the apportionment system? 

120.33 Are there situations when I would not use the apportionment system? 

 

 


 

Table of Contents—Continued 

 

Footnotes to Apportionments 

120.34 What are apportionment footnotes (and footnote indicators)? 

120.35 Do footnotes starting with the letter A correspond to Category A apportioned amounts 
while those starting with the letter B relate to Category B apportioned amounts? 

120.36 Will footnotes and additional tabs/attachments become part of the apportionment? 

120.37 What footnotes are required for agencies to include in their apportionment requests? 

120.38 Are there footnotes that are automatically applied to annual and multi-year 
apportionments? 

 

Approving Apportionment Requests 

120.39 How will OMB indicate its approval of an apportionment? 

120.40 When can I expect OMB to approve my first apportionment request for the fiscal year? 

120.41 In the case of newly enacted full-year appropriations, am I under an automatic 
apportionment until OMB approves my first full-year enacted apportionment request? 

 

After You Have Received Your Approved Apportionment 

120.42 How should I execute the apportionment? 

120.43 What if I think that I may have obligated more than the amounts apportioned? 

120.44 Must I control funds below the apportionment level? 

120.45 How should I allot once I receive an apportionment? 

120.46 How do I treat anticipated budgetary resources that are apportioned in the current fiscal 
year but not yet realized, and do I need to reapportion them once realized? 

120.47 What is the relationship between the apportionment and the Funds Control System? 

 

Changes to Previously Approved Apportionments for the Current Fiscal Year 

120.48 What types of situations could require me to request a new apportionment? 

120.49 What adjustments can I make without submitting a reapportionment request? 

120.50 What other types of adjustments can I request OMB to allow me to make without 
submitting a new apportionment request? 

120.51 What is the status of previously approved apportionments when a new apportionment is 
approved in the same fiscal year? 

 

Apportionments by Time Period 

120.52 Will OMB apportion funds into future fiscal years? 

120.53 How do I present deferrals or proposed rescissions on my request? 

120.54 Can OMB reapportion a past period? 

120.55 Do unobligated resources apportioned in earlier time periods of the same fiscal year remain 
available? 

120.56 Must I request that funds apportioned in one fiscal year be apportioned in the next fiscal 
year if the funds were not obligated and remain available? 

120.57 What is the status of approved apportionments from a previous fiscal year on 
apportionments in the current fiscal year? 

120.58 How does the last approved apportionment govern the actions a TAFS takes when the 
TAFS enters the expired phase? 

 

 


Table of Contents—Continued 

 

Apportionments Affected by a Continuing Resolution (CR) 

120.59 During a CR, what happens to TAFSs that were apportioned before the start of a fiscal year 
(e.g., no-year TAFSs)? 

120.60 After a CR has been replaced by a full-year enacted appropriation, what do I show in the 
Previous Approved column?' 

120.61 After a short-term CR has been replaced by a full-year enacted appropriation, what do I 
show in the Agency Request column? 

120.62 What do I do if the full-year enacted appropriation changes the period of availability of 
funds apportioned under a short-term CR? 

 

What Other Important Things Do I Need to Know About Apportionments 

120.63 What types of resources are apportioned by OMB? 

120.64 Are all apportionments based on authority to incur obligations? 

120.65 How do I treat extensions of the availability of unobligated balances in an apportionment? 

 

Handling Deficiencies in Apportionments 

120.66 When do I submit requests anticipating the need for the Congress to enact supplemental 
budget authority? 

 

Program Reporting Categories 

120.67 What is the purpose of program reporting categories? 

120.68 Do my estimates of program reporting category obligations limit the amount I can obligate? 

120.69 What do OMB and the agency need to do to start using program reporting categories? 

120.70 How do I fill in the program reporting category tab? 

120.71 Why does OMB send the names of program reporting categories and Category B projects 
to Treasury for use in GTAS? 

 

Exhibits—Sample Formats 

https://community-dc.max.gov/x/N4RNlg 

 

Ex–120A Program Reporting Categories Format 

 

When Your Appropriations are Enacted in a Timely Manner 

Ex–120B One-Year Appropriation⎯First Apportionment for the Current Fiscal Year 

Ex–120C No-Year Appropriation⎯First Apportionment for the Current Fiscal Year 

Ex–120D No-Year Appropriation—Reapportionment 

 

When You Operate Under a Continuing Resolution 

Ex–120E One-Year Appropriations Under Continuing Resolution 

Ex–120F Appropriations and Unobligated Balances Under a Continuing Resolution 

Ex–120G Apportionment Following a Continuing Resolution (No-Year TAFS) 

Ex–120H Apportionment Following a Continuing Resolution (Annual TAFS, Category A) 

 

When You Encounter Unusual Circumstances 

Ex–120I Public Enterprise (Revolving) or Intragovernmental (Revolving) Fund— 
Reapportionment 

 

 


Table of Contents—Continued 

 

Ex–120J Trust Fund Limitation 

Ex–120K Negative Amount Due to Reduced Unobligated Balance 

Ex–120L Apportionments in Future Fiscal Years for Multi-Year Accounts 

Ex–120M Trust Fund with Contract Authority, Appropriation to Liquidate Contract Authority, 

 and Obligation Limitation 

Ex–120N Trust Fund (or Special Fund) with Collections Precluded from Obligation 

Ex–120O Allocation Transfer Apportionment Format, Apportioning Programs 

Ex–120P Allocation Transfer Apportionment Format, Apportioning Parent and Child 

Ex–120Q Allocation Transfer Apportionment Format, Child Only 

Ex–120R Allocation Transfer Apportionment Format, Parent Only 

Ex–120S Sequester Apportionment 

Ex–120T Appropriations with Different Periods of Availability Executed by Non-Expenditure 
Transfer 

Ex–120U Rescissions and Reappropriations of Unobligated Balances as of September 30th 

Ex–120V Initial Apportionment of an Appropriation Reduced by Offsetting Collections and 
Receipts 

Ex-120W Apportionment of an Appropriation Reduced by Offsetting Collections and 
Receipts during CR period to invoke term and condition of the CR (section 123.10) 

 

Summary of Changes 

 

Clarifies guidance on display of the previous approved column for an account specific apportionment 
made during a CR period for an account that also receives an automatic apportionment (section 
120.37). 

 

Allows agencies to reflect 30-day automatically apportioned funds as they would be apportioned 
normally (either Category A or Category B) without OMB concurrence (section 120.41). 

 

Updates list of situations that could require a reapportionment request to include a scenario where a 
TAFS needs to increase an indefinite appropriation but the previously approved apportionment did 
not include an "A" footnote providing automatic apportionment authority (section 120.48). 

 

Provides link (in Table of Contents above) to view Excel versions of section 120 Exhibits on OMB 
MAX Community (Exhibits 120A-W). 

 

Updates section 120 Exhibits throughout to more consistently follow section 120 guidance (Exhibits 
120A-W). 

 

Provides an example of how to show an account-specific apportionment to account for a term and 
condition of the CR (Exhibit 120W). 

 

INTRODUCTION TO APPORTIONMENTS 

120.1 What is an apportionment? 

 

An apportionment is an OMB-approved plan to use budgetary resources (31 U.S.C. 1513(b); Executive 
Order (E.O.) 6166, as amended by E.O. 12608). It typically limits the obligations you may incur for 
specified time periods, programs, activities, projects, objects, or any combination thereof. An 


apportionment is legally binding, and obligations and expenditures (disbursements) that exceed an 
apportionment are a violation of, and are subject to reporting under, the Antideficiency Act (31 U.S.C. 
1517(a)(1), (b)). See section 145 for more on reporting violations of the Antideficiency Act. 

120.2 What terms and concepts should I understand to work with apportionments? 

 

Account-specific apportionments are approved by an OMB Deputy Associate Director (or designee) or an 
OMB official that has been delegated apportionment authority and typically include specific amounts. They 
are in contrast to automatic apportionments, described below. 

 

A Treasury Appropriation Fund Symbol (TAFS) has adjustment authority if OMB has approved an 
apportionment with a footnote in the Application of Budgetary Resources section (footnote indicator that 
starts with A) describing what new or additional resources are automatically apportioned without the need 
for OMB to approve a new apportionment and a YES is in the Line Split column of the adjustment authority 
line (AdjAut). For instance, OMB may provide adjustment authority for cases where actual earned 
reimbursements exceed the estimate on the apportionment. For more on adjustment authority, see sections 
120.49 and 120.50. 

 

The Antideficiency Act prohibits Federal employees from obligating or disbursing amounts in excess of an 
appropriation, an apportionment (or in its absence), an allotment, a suballotment or any other subdivisions 
of funds that are identified in your agency's administrative control of funds. For more on the Antideficiency 
Act, see section 145. 

 

An amount is apportioned for obligation in the current fiscal year when it appears on the Category A, 
Category B, or Category AB lines. Amounts apportioned for obligation in future fiscal years appear on the 
Category C lines. The Application of Budgetary Resources section also includes lines for amounts that are 
exempt from apportionment or not apportioned for either current or future fiscal years. 

 

An automatic apportionment is approved by the OMB Director in the form of a Bulletin or provision in 
Circular A-11, and typically describes a formula that agencies will use to calculate apportioned amounts. 
An automatic apportionment is in contrast to the account-specific apportionments, described above, which 
typically include specific amounts, and which are approved by an OMB Deputy Associate Director (or 
designee) or an OMB official that has been delegated apportionment authority. 

 

Carryover amounts are unobligated balances that are available from the prior fiscal year(s) in multi-year 
and no-year accounts. See section 120.23 regarding the submission, for OMB approval, of requests for the 
apportionment of carryover amounts. Pursuant to sections 120.7 and 120.56, carryover amounts are 
automatically apportioned at zero until an account-specific apportionment is issued for such amounts. 

 

Category A, Category B, Category AB or Category C—Apportioned amounts appear on different groups 
of lines in the Application of Budgetary Resources section of an apportionment. Amounts are identified in 
an apportionment: 

 

• by time (Category A); 


 

• by program, project, or activity (Category B); 


 

• by a combination of program, project, or activity and time period (Category AB); or 


 

• for future years (only for multi-year/no-year accounts) (Category C). 


 

You must report obligations to Treasury with the same categories as used on the apportionment. 


Exception apportionment is a colloquial term that describes a type of account-specific apportionment that 
can be issued for operations under a continuing resolution (CR), in lieu of the OMB-issued automatic 
apportionment. This excludes account-specific written apportionments for an anomaly provided in the CR. 
OMB approves exception apportionment requests only in extraordinary circumstances. See section 123.9 
for additional guidance. 

 

Footnotes provide additional information and direction beyond the line stubs and dollar amounts. See 
section 120.34 for more information. 

 

Impoundment—Pursuant to the Impoundment Control Act, apportionments may also set aside all or a 
portion of the amounts available for obligation. 

 

• Amounts deferred through the apportionment process are those portions of the total amounts 
available for obligation that are specifically set aside as temporarily not available until released by 
OMB. 


 

• Amounts withheld pending rescission are those portions that are set aside pending the enactment 
of legislation reducing the authority to obligate such funds. 


 

For further information on deferrals and rescissions, including the difference between an impoundment and 
a cancellation proposed by the President, see section 112. 

 

The line split column allows you to provide information about a line or to distinguish between two or more 
budgetary resource amounts that you would otherwise put on a single line. For more details on line splits, 
see section 120.19. 

 

Memo obligations are amounts obligated during the current fiscal year at the time the apportionment request 
is prepared. The date of the obligations is at the top of the column. 

 

Program reporting category—Agencies and OMB will work together to determine the program reporting 
categories (if any, section 120.67) under which the agencies will report their obligations in their SF 133 
Reports on Budget Execution and Budgetary Resources (see section 130). Program reporting categories 
should be based on elements that agencies track in their financial systems. Though you are encouraged to 
use program reporting categories, there are some cases where OMB and agencies will choose not to use 
any. 

 

The program reporting categories are not used to apportion funds and are not subject to the Antideficiency 
Act (Appendix G). 

 

Reapportionments are made when you need to make changes to the previously approved apportionment for 
the current year (section 120.48). For example, you should request a reapportionment when approved 
apportionments are no longer appropriate or applicable because the amounts available for obligation have 
increased or unforeseen events have occurred. 

 

The Treasury Appropriation Fund Symbol (TAFS) combines the Treasury agency or department code, the 
Federal account symbol, and the period of availability of the resources in the account (section 20.3). The 
period of availability may be annual, multi-year, or no-year (section 20.4(c)). Annual TAFSs have funds 
that are available for obligation for no longer than one fiscal year. Multi-year TAFSs have funds that are 
available for a specified period of time in excess of one fiscal year. No-year TAFSs have funds that are 
available until expended. See section 20.4 for more details. 

 


The Department of the Treasury's list of account symbols may be found here: 
http://fiscal.treasury.gov/fsreports/ref/fastbook/fastbook_home.htm. 

120.3 Are apportionments made at the Treasury appropriation fund symbol (TAFS) level? 

 

Yes, apportionments are only made at the TAFS level. See section 20.11 for more details on TAFSs. For 
cases of allocation transfers, see section 120.29. 

120.4 What TAFSs are required to be apportioned? 

 

All TAFSs are required to be apportioned, except in the case of a TAFS that is in its entirety exempt from 
apportionment. See section 120.6 for a TAFS that is partially exempt from apportionment. 

 

OMB is required to post all approved apportionment documents on a public website. Those apportionments 
can be found here: https://apportionment-public.max.gov/. 

120.5 What TAFSs are exempt from apportionment? 

 

The following types of TAFSs are exempt from apportionment: 

 

• TAFSs specifically exempted from apportionment by 31 U.S.C. 1511(b) or other laws. 


 

• TAFSs for which budgetary resources: 


 

 have expired and therefore the expired TAFS cannot be reapportioned in the expired 
phase (in this case, the last apportionment during the unexpired phase applies); 


 

 have been fully obligated before the beginning of the fiscal year; or 


 

 are available only for transfer to other TAFSs (unless OMB determines otherwise), 
which can include TAFSs where the sole purpose of the TAFSs is to effectuate an 
expenditure transfer between fund types (e.g., between Federal funds and trust funds) 
(see below for additional information). 


 

Because transfer-only TAFSs that require expenditure transfers (due to crossing Federal fund group to a 
trust fund) involve an obligation, you must request a letter from your OMB Deputy Associate Director for 
proper funds control documentation that the TAFS is exempt from apportionment because the funds are 
available only for transfer to other TAFSs. 

 

• TAFSs of the following types, which the OMB Director may exempt from apportionment pursuant 
to 31 U.S.C. 1516: 


 

 Trust funds or working funds if an expenditure from the fund has no significant effect 
on the financial operations of the United States Government; 


 

 Management funds (Treasury TAFSs with the symbols 3900–3999); 


 

 Payment of claims, judgments, refunds, and drawbacks; 


 

 Payment under private relief acts and other laws that require payment to a designated 
payee in the total amount provided in such acts; 


 


 Foreign currency fund TAFSs (unless OMB requests), section 120.63; 


 

 Interest on, or retirement of, the public debt; and 


 

 Items the President has determined to be of a confidential nature for apportionment 
and budget execution purposes. 


 

In order to request that the OMB Director exempt a TAFS from apportionment pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 1516, 
you must send in a formal request with the justification. Your OMB Deputy Associate Director (DAD) or 
an OMB official that has been delegated apportionment authority will formally notify you in writing about 
your exemption request. Memoranda that the DAD or delegated official provides to the agency providing 
an exemption will also be posted within the apportionment system. 

 

If your exemption request is pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 1516 and specifically for a trust fund or working funds 
with expenditures that do not have significant effect on the financial operations of the United States 
Government, your request needs to demonstrate that fact using historical information such as the magnitude 
of the gifts and donations funding compared to the overall size of the agency's budget, the pattern of 
obligations in that fund, etc. 

 

To see a list of TAFSs that are exempt from apportionment, a report is available through the apportionment 
system. 

120.6 Can a portion of my TAFS be exempt from apportionment? 

 

Yes, in a very limited number of cases, only a portion of the budgetary resources for a TAFS must be 
apportioned. In these cases, agencies must show the full amount of budgetary resources—both exempt 
from apportionment and non-exempt—in the Budgetary Resources section and show the amounts subject 
to apportionment on apportioned lines, and the amounts not subject to apportionment on Line 6183, Exempt 
from apportionment in the Application of Budgetary Resources section. 

120.7 Do I need to submit an apportionment every fiscal year for TAFSs that are multi-year/no-
year? 

 

Yes. Multi-year/no-year TAFSs with unexpired budgetary resources available for obligation MUST be 
apportioned every fiscal year, unless exempt under section 120.5. See also section 120.56. 

120.8 Can I incur obligations without an apportionment? 

 

No, an obligation cannot be incurred without an OMB approved apportionment (account-specific or 
automatic), except when the relevant account, from which the amounts are being obligated, is exempt from 
apportionment. The Antideficiency Act (section 145) prohibits the incurring of obligations that exceed the 
approved apportionment amount (including, e.g., purchase services or merchandise). See section 145 for 
specifics on the Antideficiency Act. 

120.9 Can I use an apportionment to resolve legal issues about the availability of funds? 

 

No. The apportionment of funds is not a means for resolving any question dealing with the legality of the 
amounts available by law or the legality of using funds for the purpose for which they are apportioned. Any 
question as to the legality of the amounts available by law, or the legality of using funds for a particular 
purpose, must be resolved through agency legal channels. Importantly, OMB's approval of an 
apportionment request does not reflect OMB's concurrence with an agency's legal position. 

 


WHAT IS IN AN APPORTIONMENT? 

120.10 How is the apportionment organized? 

 

The top of the apportionment shows the name and account number of the TAFS being apportioned, and 
often includes other descriptive information, e.g., agency name, bureau name, budget account name and 
number. 

 

The apportionment always includes two sections: Budgetary Resources and Application of Budgetary 
Resources. The Budgetary Resources section always appears toward the top of the apportionment, and 
must show all budgetary resources available to the TAFS (e.g., appropriations, reductions, non-expenditure 
transfers). The Application of Budgetary Resources shows apportioned amounts, which are legal limits that 
restrict how much an agency can obligate, when it can obligate, and what projects, programs, and activities 
it can obligate for. 

 

Apportionments for guaranteed loan accounts include a third section, Guaranteed Loan Levels and 
Applications. 

 

Each section of an apportionment includes line numbers and descriptions of all pertinent amounts. See 
Appendix F1 for a complete list of line numbers and detail descriptions for each line. 

120.11 Why is the Budgetary Resources section needed? 

 

The Budgetary Resources section is necessary for several reasons. 

 

• First, it provides sufficient detail for OMB to see what level of funding is coming into the TAFS 
and therefore available to be apportioned. In many cases, apportioned amounts tie back to amounts 
on specific budgetary resource lines. 


 

• Second, budgetary resource lines on apportionments match the lines used in the President's Budget 
Program and Financing schedule and SF 133 Report on Budget Execution and Budgetary 
Resources. The reason that these three presentations use the same line numbers is to facilitate 
comparisons that provide agencies and OMB with a basis to know they are looking at the right 
numbers. In addition, the Budget Enforcement Act (BEA) category (i.e., discretionary or 
mandatory) information in this section is provided to the Treasury Department to facilitate agency 
reporting of BEA information in budget execution reports. 


 

• Third, the apportionment is the first step in a fiscal year's budget execution process, and provides 
the basis for agencies to post information in their funds control and financial systems. 


120.12 After OMB approves an apportionment, can I obligate against all budgetary resources? 

 

Not necessarily. You should not obligate until apportioned amounts have been allotted in accordance with 
your agency's OMB-approved funds control regulations (see section 150, Administrative Control of Funds). 
There are other circumstances in which you cannot obligate funds following an apportionment. For 
example, you cannot obligate against anticipated resources. You must wait until the resources are realized 
before incurring obligations. Additionally, in some cases, a footnote to the apportionment will state that 
amounts are apportioned, but are only available for obligation when specified events occur (such as an 
agency taking certain action). 


120.13 What is the format of the Application of Budgetary Resources section and what categories 
does OMB use to apportion funds? 

 

OMB usually uses one of four categories to apportion budgetary resources in a TAFS. 

 

Category A apportions budgetary resources by fiscal quarters, e.g., quarter one (October 1 through 
December 31) and quarter two (January 1 through March 31). Lines 6001 through 6004 are used for 
quarters one through four, respectively. 

 

Category B apportions budgetary resources by program, project, activities, objects or a combination of these 
categories. Lines 6011 through 6110 are used for Category B apportioned amounts. One TAFS can 
potentially have dozens of Category B apportionments, each pertaining to specific activities, projects, and 
so on. There are also cases when it makes programmatic sense for OMB to use a single, Category B 
apportionment for a given TAFS. 

 

Category AB apportions budgetary resources by a combination of fiscal quarters and projects. You may 
use Lines 6111 through 6159 to apportion in this manner. See section 8 of Appendix F for a full list of line 
numbers and descriptions. 

 

Category C apportions budgetary resources in multi-year and no-year TAFSs into future fiscal years. Lines 
6170 thru 6173 are used for Category C apportioned amounts. (Note: Category C amounts that OMB 
apportions in one year are not available for you to obligate against in the following year. For these amounts 
to be available, OMB must approve a new request in the following year that apportions these amounts on 
Category A, B, or AB lines.) See section 120.52 for additional information. 

 

Apportionments may include a combination of categories. 

 

In some cases (uncommon), resources in the Budgetary Resources section are not apportioned. In such 
cases, the non-apportioned budgetary resources are shown using one of four apportionment lines — 

 

(1) 6180, Withheld pending rescission (rarely used), 


 

(2) 6181, Deferred (rarely used), 


 

(3) 6182, Unapportioned balance of a revolving fund, and 


 

(4) 6183, Exempt from apportionment (uncommon, and used in TAFSs with both budgetary resources 
subject to and exempt from apportionment — at the bottom of the section on the Application of 
Budgetary Resources). 


 

Agencies must report obligations to Treasury (GTAS) using the same level of specificity as appears on the 
apportioned section of your most recent approved apportionment. For instance, if OMB uses a single 
Category B project with five program reporting categories, you must report obligations for each program 
reporting category. Likewise, if OMB uses ten Category B projects and you incur obligations for each of 
these projects, your GTAS submission and SF 133 budget execution report must show obligations for each 
of these ten Category B projects and continue to report them in the expired phase. 

120.14 What is the format of the Guaranteed Loan Levels and Applications section? 

 

An apportionment for guaranteed loan financing accounts can have a third section, Guaranteed Loan Levels 
and Applications section. This section shows limitations on loan levels by program level either from the 
current year and/or unused from prior year(s), and the application of the program level by quarter, risk 


category, or a combination. The total of the limitation on loan levels by program level should equal the 
total of the application of the program levels. 

120.15 What other kinds of information may an apportionment include? 

 

Many kinds of additional information can be integrated into an apportionment request. Here are some 
examples. 

 

Allocations. The allocations tab (if required by your RMO examiner) includes a list of all transfer allocation 
(or children) accounts that are expected to receive a non-expenditure transfer of funds from the parent TAFS 
being apportioned. The allocation accounts are subject to the Antideficiency Act. Unless OMB separately 
apportions an allocation account after apportioning the parent account, the allocation account must follow 
all apportioned amounts, footnotes, and other guidance of the parent account (see section 120.29 for more 
details). 

 

Footnotes. Footnotes appear on one of three tabs: "Previously Approved Footnotes," "Agency Footnotes," 
and "OMB Footnotes." Footnotes on the OMB Action column in the Application of Budgetary Resources 
section (footnote indicator starts with A) are subject to the Antideficiency Act. See section 120.34 for 
additional information on footnotes. 

 

Program Reporting Categories. When used, these identify the level of detail that an agency must use in 
reporting its obligations on SF 133 budget execution reports. These appear on the PgmCat tab in the 
apportionment request. These are not subject to the Antideficiency Act. See section 120.67 for additional 
information on program reporting categories. 

 

System-generated reports. When agencies validate requests, the apportionment system sometimes creates 
reports showing latest SF 133 versus the apportionment request; warrants; and non-expenditure transfers. 
These reports are not subject to the Antideficiency Act. 

 

Additional tabs. Apportionments are almost always prepared, submitted and approved in Excel files. 
Certain tabs in the Excel file house the apportionment request or footnotes. Others are reserved for other 
specific kinds of information. Agencies may also use additional tabs as attachments to the apportionment. 
Tabs in the Excel file are only subject to the Antideficiency Act if specifically referenced in a footnote in 
the OMB Action column of the Application of Budgetary Resources section of the apportionment (see 
section 120.36). 

 

Attachments. Attachments may include Word, PDF, or Excel files with a wide range of information that 
pertains to the apportionment request, but that is not included in the Excel file containing the request. These 
attachments are subject to the Antideficiency Act only if they are specifically referenced in a footnote in 
the OMB Action column of the Application of Budgetary Resources section of the apportionment (see 
section 120.36). 

 

PREPARING THE APPORTIONMENT REQUEST 

120.16 How can I submit an apportionment request? 

 

The vast majority of apportionments are submitted by agencies and approved by OMB using OMB's secure, 
web-based apportionment system. When questions or issues arise using the system, please send the Excel 
file you are working with and a brief description of the issue to "apportionment@omb.eop.gov." Please 
direct questions of a substantive nature to your OMB representative. 

 


In a limited number of cases necessitated by extenuating circumstances, OMB may approve an 
apportionment by e-mail or other non-system methods consistent with 31 U.S.C. 1513. Once the 
extenuating circumstances have passed (or sooner if possible), agencies and OMB should process these 
same requests using the apportionment system. 

120.17 Is there a standard, set number of lines to show in an apportionment request? 

 

No. While the format of the request is fixed and uses specific columns to hold certain kinds of information, 
the number of lines used for a given TAFS varies considerably. The apportionment system allows you to 
pick from more than 125 different budgetary resource lines, but agencies will only want to show amounts 
on a few of these lines for any given TAFS. For example, a TAFS with only an annual appropriation may 
just use one budgetary resource line. 

 

The system provides significant flexibility to allow agencies to put in other lines with zero amounts. For 
instance, an apportionment for a given TAFS might show all discretionary appropriations lines, but no 
mandatory appropriations lines. Agencies must work closely with their OMB representatives in determining 
which budgetary resource lines to show with zero amounts (e.g., post short-term continuing resolution, see 
section 120.62). 

 

Appendix F1 shows all possible line choices that are available in the apportionment system. 

120.18 What header information at the top of the apportionment must I complete? 

 

The header must provide the fiscal year for the apportionment and a public law (if no public law is available 
right after the enactment of the bill, the H.R. number is acceptable). The public law reference may be 
descriptive if there are multiple public laws covered by the apportionment or if the annual appropriations 
act is not enacted. Some examples are: 

 

• Funds provided by Public Law N/A – Carryover 


 

• Funds provided by Public Law N/A – Multiple 


120.19 What do I put in each column of the apportionment request? 

 

TAFS. TAFS information appears in columns A through F of apportionment requests. The columns show: 
Treasury agency; period of availability (FY1 and FY2); and allocation account and sub-account, if 
applicable. For presentation purposes, these columns are often hidden. You can unhide these columns if 
necessary. As part of validating requests or sending requests, the system checks that these columns are 
filled out properly; if they are not, the system provides an error message. 

 

The apportionment system will only accept apportionments that use the three-digit CGAC agency codes 
(see Appendix C for a listing). For these apportionments, each TAFS code will appear in a single cell, and 
columns A through F will no longer be dedicated to showing that information. 

 

Line numbers. Appendix F1 shows a complete list of line numbers and descriptions. 

 

Line splits. You must provide line split in the following cases: 

 

• The IterNo (Iteration Number) line shows the number of times OMB has approved (apportioned) 
an apportionment for a given TAFS in a fiscal year. No action is necessary if you use the Create 
Template function in the apportionment system as a starting point for preparing your requests. The 



apportionment system automatically puts in the Iteration Number in the line split column, as well 
as puts the last approval date in the line stub column. 


 

• The RptCat line indicates whether the TAFS uses Program Reporting Categories (section 120.67). 
Use "YES" or "NO", as appropriate, for the line split column. 


 

• The AdjAut line indicates whether OMB has approved a footnote in the Application of Budgetary 
Resources section (footnote indicator that starts with A) on the apportionment that allows specific 
types of adjustments to be made without submitting a reapportionment request. Use "YES" or 
"NO", as appropriate, for the line split column. (See section 120.50) 


 

• Line 1000 shows unobligated balances. For unobligated balances in no-year and multi-year TAFSs 
with both mandatory and discretionary funding, you must use a line split that starts with the letter 
"D" to show the portion of the balances that are discretionary. To distinguish between estimated 
and actual balances, use line splits of "E" to show estimated balances or "A" to show actual 
balances. Use "DE" or "DA" to indicate estimated from actual discretionary balances, respectively, 
and use "ME" and "MA" to indicate estimated from actual mandatory balances (section 120.20). 


 

You may use the line splits to distinguish between two or more amounts that you would otherwise put on a 
single line. For example, you may use line splits to distinguish between two or more sources of collections, 
to distinguish between unobligated balances from reimbursable authority versus direct appropriations, or 
even to distinguish sequestration amounts on an apportionment. 

 

You cannot use line number splits for the Application of Budgetary Resources section. 

 

Previous Approved Column. 

 

• Leave the column blank for the first request you submit for a given fiscal year. See exhibits 120C, 
and 120D, and 120F for examples of an annual (one-year) appropriation, a no-year appropriation, 
and appropriations provided by a continuing resolution. 


 

• Include amounts from the "OMB Action" column of the previously approved apportionment within 
the same fiscal year. This includes any adjustments under sections 120.49 or unless your RMO 
determines any other adjustment authority granted to you by OMB in writing (section 120.50). 


 

• When appropriations are enacted following one or more CRs, include the amounts from the last CR 
in this column (see section 120.60) unless otherwise required by your RMO. 


 

• For reapportionment requests add the indicator, e.g., A1, B1\B2, which indicates that a footnote(s) 
appears on the previous approved footnote worksheet tab. If your earlier apportionment had 
footnotes, the worksheet tab will be automatically populated by the apportionment system. 


 

Agency Request Column. 

 

• Include the amounts you are requesting in this column. 


 

• Include an indicator, e.g., A1, B1, which indicates that a footnote appears on the agency footnote 
tab. See section 120.34 for more information on footnotes. 


 

 

 

 


OMB Action Column. 

 

• The apportionment system places formulas in the OMB Action column to set it equal to the Agency 
Request column. OMB will adjust the OMB Action values as necessary when reviewing and 
approving your request. 


 

• Include an indicator, e.g., A1, B1, which indicates that a footnote appears on the approved footnote 
tab. The footnotes in the OMB Footnote column override all other footnotes. 


 

Memo Obligations Column. 

 

• Include memorandum obligations in this column. Also include the date of the obligations using 
the MM-DD-YYYY format on the RptCat row. The memo obligations support your 
reapportionment request. 


120.20 Do I need to follow special conventions to show the portion of discretionary balances in split 
accounts (TAFSs with both mandatory and discretionary funds)? 

 

Yes. For unobligated balances in no-year and multi-year TAFSs with both mandatory and discretionary 
funding (split accounts), you must show the discretionary portion of the balances by using a line split that 
starts with the letter "D" and you must show the mandatory portion of the balances by using a line split that 
starts with the letter "M". You will do this solely on Line 1000, Unobligated balance, brought forward, 
Oct. 1. You must also change the Line Stub to start with the word Discretionary, e.g., Discretionary 
Unobligated balance, brought forward, Oct. 1 or Mandatory Unobligated balance, brought forward, Oct. 1, 
as appropriate. Many agencies use line splits of "E" or "A" to distinguish Estimated from Actual balances, 
respectively. In these cases, you would use "DE" or "DA" to indicate estimated from actual discretionary 
balances, respectively and you would use "ME" or "MA" to indicate estimated from actual mandatory 
balances, respectively. 

120.21 Can I use amounts that include decimal points or cents in an apportionment? 

 

No. You must round all amounts up to a dollar in apportionment requests. In addition, you may not round 
amounts to thousands. When you round up, the delta between the actual cents and the amount apportioned 
is not available for obligation and your funds control system must reflect that. Additionally, you should 
add a "B" footnote on line 1920 of the Budgetary Resource section of the apportionment to indicate that 
rounding has occurred and, therefore, rounded amounts on the apportionment will not match amounts 
reported on the SF 133 which are reported to the penny. Here is an example of such a footnote: 

 

"Pursuant to section 120.21 of OMB Circular A-11, one or more lines in the Budgetary Resources section 
may be rounded up. As a result, those rounded lines will not match the actuals reported on the SF 133. 
Agency will ensure that its funds control system will only allot actuals." 

120.22 Should I use a specific numeric format in the Excel file that holds my request? 

 

Yes, you must use whole numbers (decimal points are not permitted) or blanks in numeric columns. 
Numeric columns include the Previous Approved Amount, Agency Request, OMB Action, and 
Memorandum Obligations columns. Numbers (including zero) must be formatted using the number format 
with thousands separator (a comma), and with a leading negative sign (-). You cannot use asterisk, special 
characters, or letters in numeric columns of any apportionment request. Further, you cannot format a 
number, zero or otherwise, to appear as an asterisk or other special character. There is a single exception: 
in the memorandum obligations column only, you may use a date format on the RptCat line. 


120.23 When are apportionments due at OMB for a new fiscal year? 

 

If ... 

Then, submit your first apportionment request by... 

Any part of the budgetary resources for a TAFS is not 
determined by current action of the Congress (such as 
permanent appropriations, public enterprise and other 
revolving funds subject to apportionment, 
reimbursements and other income, and balances of 
prior year budget authority) 

August 21, as required by 31 U.S.C. 1513(b) 

All or any part of the budgetary resources for a TAFS 
are determined by current action of the Congress 

August 21, or within 10 calendar days after the 
enactment of the appropriation or substantive acts 
providing new budget authority (i.e., authorization 
bills), whichever is later 



 

After August 21, OMB requires an explanation for any delayed initial apportionment requests in accounts 
with budgetary resources not dependent on current action of the Congress. 

 

We encourage you to begin preparation of apportionments and related materials as soon as the House and 
Senate have reached agreement on funding levels. In this way, you can make a timely submission of your 
request to OMB, and OMB can have adequate time for its review. 

120.24 When is the apportionment system open for a new fiscal year? 

 

The apportionment system will open to agencies to start preparing requests no later than August 1 (or the 
following business day). Agencies can submit their requests starting August 8. 

120.25 Can I combine TAFSs on a single apportionment? 

 

No. From time to time, agencies ask whether they can combine (or "roll-up") the amounts from two or 
more TAFSs, and submit an apportionment for this single "combined" TAFSs (e.g., miscellaneous 
accounts). Agencies may not do this because the apportionments must tie back to the statutory authority, 
which explicitly makes distinctions between accounts and defines the period of availability of the funds in 
the accounts. These are generally the same pieces of information that distinguish one TAFS from another. 

120.26 Should I assemble apportionment requests for multiple TAFSs in a single package or file? 

 

Yes, unless your OMB representative determines otherwise. To the extent practical, submit apportionment 
requests for each independent agency, departmental bureau, or similar subdivision together. 

120.27 Can I cross-check information in the Budgetary Resources section? 

 

Yes. You can cross-check information in certain cases against the President's Budget or the most recent SF 
133 Reports. In addition, for general fund TAFSs, you should check that appropriations and warrants by 
Treasury (if any) are consistent and you can check that actual non-expenditure transfers match transfers 
processed at Treasury. See https://community-dc.max.gov/x/v5Bwkg. 

120.28 Who can approve the apportionment request for the agency? 

 

Agencies must use appropriate internal controls in preparing apportionment requests, and specifically 
ensure that the agency official with authority to review and approve the request has done so. The approving 


official at the agency is not required to sign the request that is sent to OMB, but may do so if required by 
the agency's internal controls or if requested by the OMB examining division. OMB's apportionment 
system does not accommodate electronic signatures of agency officials. 

120.29 Who is responsible for preparing the apportionment request for allocation (parent/child) 
accounts? 

 

Allocation accounts involve both a "parent" appropriation and a "child" recipient of budgetary resources 
via an allocation non-expenditure transfer. For instance, if an appropriation is enacted to the Funds 
Appropriated to the President's International Military Education and Training account (11-1081 /X), and a 
subsequent allocation is made to the Department of the Army (Treasury agency 21), then the allocation 
non-expenditure transfer from 11-1081 /X to Army would be as follows: 11-1081 /X transfer to 21-11-
1081 /X. 

 

Unless OMB determines otherwise, the agency that receives the appropriation to be allocated (the "parent") 
should submit a single, consolidated apportionment request that encompasses both the parent TAFS and all 
the allocated recipient "child" agencies and/or bureau TAFSs (see exhibit 120P for an example that uses 
different lines to distinguish between the parent and children on the apportionment). Additionally, 
allocation transfers are normally apportioned at the same category level as the parent account (e.g., Category 
A, B, AB, or C). The agency administering the parent TAFS will indicate to the receiving agency what 
portion of the consolidated apportionment is transferred to the allocation TAFSs. 

 

Allocation account apportionments, however, can be done in different ways. See exhibit 120R for an 
example of a parent-only allocation apportionment and exhibit 120Q for an example of a child-only 
allocation transfer apportionment. 

 

The parent agency must ensure that the recipients are provided the approved apportionment request on a 
timely basis. Obligations incurred for the program as a whole are limited by the approved apportionment. 
Receiving agencies will be responsible for keeping obligations within the amount so specified in the 
apportionment or to the amount transferred to it from the parent. 

 

Allocation worksheets are no longer required if you are using allocations on the apportionment. 

 

In order for the transfers to crosswalk correctly in the SF 133 and President's Budget, please ensure that 
both the parent and child use the appropriate USSGL for allocation transfers 
(http://www.fms.treas.gov/ussgl/index.html). 

 

SUBMITTING APPORTIONMENT REQUESTS 

120.30 How do I submit apportionment requests to OMB? 

 

Agencies will typically use OMB's web-based apportionment system to submit their apportionment requests 
to OMB (see section 120.32 for getting permission in the system to send). In those circumstances when 
you are unable to use the web-based system, e-mail the Excel file containing your request to your OMB 
representative. You will almost always be required to send OMB an electronic copy of the apportionment 
request. In some cases, the OMB representative may request you to provide a hard copy of the signed 
request. 

 

 


120.31 What functions will I perform using the apportionment system? 

 

OMB's web-based apportionment system is the primary system agencies will use to prepare, submit, and 
run reports on their apportionment requests. Staffers with authority to use the system may use the 
Support\Links tab to find detailed guidance on using the system. 

 

Below is a brief overview of the major functions. 

 

(a) Create template 

 

Use the Create Template screen to get a starting point for your request. If you are only creating one TAFS, 
the data entry screen is the best starting point. If the TAFS you are working with has already been 
apportioned in the fiscal year for which you are submitting a request, the system will create a properly 
formatted Excel file with the most recently approved information in the Previous Approved column. If the 
TAFS has not yet been apportioned or has never been apportioned, you can draw source data from a 
previous fiscal year and/or a different TAFS to provide a starting point for your request. 

 

(b) Validate 

 

After you have created a template and updated it to reflect the proper information for your request, use the 
Validate Request screen to do two things: check for any math or formatting errors, and if there are no errors, 
create a new file that is ready to be submitted to OMB. This file will have several Excel tabs that were not 
in your original template. It will have the tab called Appor_Req_to_OMB with the primary apportionment 
information. It will have a tab to hold any footnotes that OMB may wish to include with the apportionment. 
If any of the TAFSs in your file have warrants, transfers, or SF 133 data (excluding parent or child allocation 
accounts) for the fiscal year of your requests, the validated file will also have tabs to display these items. 
You will need to download and save this file wherever you keep your apportionment files. 

 

(c) Send 

 

If your agency administrator has given you the ability to send requests, you can use the Send tab to send 
files to OMB, or in some cases, to send files to a central office in your agency that will approve requests 
and send them to OMB. 

 

(d) Run reports 

 

At any time, you can go to the Run Reports tab to find information associated with your apportionment 
request, including the latest approved amounts, the latest submission and approval dates, etc. 

120.32 How do I gain access to the apportionment system? 

 

The apportionment system can be found here: https://apportionment.max.gov. 

 

In order to use the apportionment system to prepare requests and run reports, you must have a MAX User 
ID and your agency administrator must add you to one or more apportionment groups. Your administrator 
may also choose to give you the ability to submit requests to OMB. 

 

You can register for a MAX User ID here: https://portal.max.gov/portal/main/displayRegistrationForm. 

You can find your agency administrator here: https://portal.max.gov/home/sa/findAgencyAdminForm. 

 


120.33 Are there situations when I would not use the apportionment system? 

 

In limited circumstances, OMB may apportion using a letter apportionment. Additionally, during a 
continuing resolution period, OMB will sometimes apportion certain types of budgetary resources, such as 
spending authority from offsetting collections, using a blanket written letter apportionment in addition to 
the OMB CR Bulletin. Consult your OMB representative for more information. 

 

FOOTNOTES TO APPORTIONMENTS 

120.34 What are apportionment footnotes (and footnote indicators)? 

 

The request tab of an apportionment includes columns for previous approved amounts, agency request, and 
OMB action. Next to each of these columns, in turn, is a column for a footnote indicator. The use of a 
footnote indicator on the request tab, e.g., A1, B1, indicates that one or more footnotes are associated with 
that line. 

 

Footnotes appear as textual descriptions on specific tabs in the apportionment file, and typically provide 
additional information or direction associated with one or more lines on the request. A request includes 
separate footnote tabs associated with amounts in the previously approved request column, agency requests 
column, and OMB Action column. Footnotes are divided into two basic groups: footnotes for apportioned 
amounts (in the Application of Budgetary Resources section), and informational footnotes for budgetary 
resources. 

 

Footnotes for Apportioned Amounts (Application of Budgetary Resources section). Each footnote indicator 
in this section begins with the letter A. These footnotes are associated with one or more lines in the 
Application of Budgetary Resources section (the bottom section of the apportionment, OMB action 
column), have legal effect, and are subject to the Antideficiency Act. For example, a footnote may allow 
for an upward adjustment of budgetary resources in excess of amounts prescribed in section 120.49 without 
the need for further action by OMB. 

 

Footnotes for Budgetary Resources (Budgetary Resources section). Each footnote indicator in this section 
begins with the letter B. These footnotes are informational and are associated with one or more lines in the 
Budgetary Resources section (the top section of the apportionment). For example, a footnote may identify 
the source of offsetting collections or explain the basis for amounts on a recovery line. Because these 
footnotes are not in the Application of Budgetary Resources section (e.g., apportioned), they have no legal 
effect. 

 

Indicators for footnotes. Footnotes are designated (indicated) through a letter/number combination. Each 
footnote indicator starts with a letter A or B (A for apportioned amounts in the application of budgetary 
resource section; B for budgetary resource), which is followed by a one- or two-digit number: e.g., B1. If 
a single line has more than one footnote, separate the indicators with commas: A1, A2, A3. 

 

You can find more detailed implementation guidance in OMB's secure, web-based apportionment system 
under the "Open Support \ Links" tab in navigation menu. 

120.35 Do footnotes starting with the letter A correspond to Category A apportioned amounts while 
those starting with the letter B relate to Category B apportioned amounts? 

 

No. Footnote indicators associated with lines in the Budgetary Resources section start with the letter B. 
Footnote indicators associated with lines in the Application of Budgetary Resources section (apportioned 


amounts) start with the letter A (irrespective of whether apportioned amounts are Category A, B, AB, 
or C). 

120.36 Will footnotes and additional tabs/attachments become part of the apportionment? 

 

Yes, but they will only be subject to the Antideficiency Act if they are specifically referenced in a footnote 
in the OMB Action column of the Application of Budgetary Resources section of the apportionment. 

 

It is no longer necessary to include a footnote stating that attachments not referenced in the apportionment 
are not subject to the Antideficiency Act. 

120.37 What footnotes are required for agencies to include in their apportionment requests? 

 

There is no universal requirement to include footnotes in an apportionment request, except for those 
required after a short-term CR (see section 120.60). Many apportionments are approved without footnotes. 
Here are examples of cases when you use footnotes: 

 

• If you submit an apportionment request and OMB included footnotes in the OMB Footnotes tab of 
the last approved apportionment, the previously approved footnote indicators must appear in the 
Prev Footnote column and the text must appear in the Previously Approved Footnotes tab. 


 

• If a particular TAFS has a standard footnote year after year, retain it in your apportionment request 
unless you have consulted with OMB. 


 

• Include any footnotes your OMB examining division has specifically directed you to include. 


 

• Unless OMB determines otherwise, when amounts are automatically apportioned (as specified in 
sections 120.49, 120.50 (if applicable) or section 185.20) and there is a subsequent need for 
reapportionment, show automatically apportioned amounts in the previously approved column. 
Include a footnote noting where changes have been previously made as automatic apportionments. 


 

• During a CR period, if you are reapportioning an account that has budgetary resources provided by 
other Acts (e.g., unobligated balances, spending authority from offsetting collections, etc.) and a 
CR Bulletin, you do not need to show the automatically apportioned amounts in the previously 
approved column. However, you must continue the footnote provided in section 123.17. Please see 
section 120.59 for more details. 


120.38 Are there footnotes that are automatically applied to annual and multi-year apportionments? 

 

Yes. The following footnote is automatically apportioned for all annual and/or multi-year TAFS that may 
need to liquidate obligations that were incurred against canceled appropriations: 

 

"Pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 1553(b), not to exceed one percent of the total appropriations for this account is 
apportioned for the purpose of paying legitimate obligations related to canceled appropriations." 

 

Written apportionments should no longer include this footnote. 

 

 

 


APPROVING APPORTIONMENT REQUESTS 

120.39 How will OMB indicate its approval of an apportionment? 

 

When OMB approves an apportionment through the apportionment system, you will receive an e-mail with 
the approved Excel file attached. The e-mail will be from 'apportionment@omb.gov,' and the subject line 
will include the words 'Approved Apportionment.' 

 

• The Excel file will include a tab called 'Approval Info,' which shows the name, title, and digital 
signature imprint of the OMB official who approved the apportionment, as well as other pertinent 
information. 
o The official who approves the apportionment may affix her or his electronic signature to 
the request; or 
o The official approving a request may sign a paper copy in ink and instruct a staffer to put 
a digitized picture of the official's signature (along with a note saying which staffer affixed 
the signature) on the apportionment. 





 

 

 

In some cases, the 'Approval Info' tab may not be present. In those cases, OMB will e-mail or fax a hard 
copy of the apportionment that displays the signature of the approving OMB official. 

 

The Excel file is locked, and should be opened in read-only mode. OMB maintains a copy of the approved 
apportionment in its secure, web-based system. OMB also maintains the signed-in-ink apportionment in 
those cases when a designated staffer affixes an official's digitized signature to the apportionment. As OMB 
continues to transition from using ink signatures to using digital authoritative marks, you may receive 
apportionments that have been approved using either method. 

 

OMB may also choose to indicate its approval of an apportionment in other ways, including by letter, 
telephone, hard copy, or other method that is appropriate to the particular circumstance. For instance, in 
rare circumstances where you need to obligate against a submitted reapportionment as soon as possible, 
you do not have to wait to receive the signed apportionment in the system before obligating if OMB has 
notified you that your reapportionment has already been approved. 

 120.40 When can I expect OMB to approve my first apportionment request for the fiscal year? 

 

If a TAFS has any budgetary resources that are not determined by current actions of the Congress (e.g., 
permanent appropriations, carryover of unobligated balances, anticipated collections), OMB will notify you 
of the action taken on your first apportionment request for the fiscal year by September 10, as required by 
law (for requests submitted by the August 21 deadline specified by law). For TAFSs that have budgetary 
resources solely as a result of current action by the Congress (e.g., TAFSs where the only budgetary 
resource is a discretionary appropriation), OMB will notify you of the action taken on your request by 
September 10 for requests submitted by August 21 or within 30 calendar days after the approval of the act 
providing new budget authority, whichever is later. 

120.41 In the case of newly enacted full-year appropriations, am I under an automatic 
apportionment until OMB approves my first full-year enacted apportionment request? 

 

Yes. Under this section, newly enacted full-year appropriations, including supplemental appropriations for 
the current year, are automatically apportioned the pro-rata share (1/365th for each day, 1/366th for a leap-
year) of the current year's enacted appropriation level. 

 


Once a full-year appropriations Act is enacted, and if the Act was preceded by a short-term continuing 
resolution (CR), the automatic apportionment provided by the OMB CR Bulletin is no longer in effect; 
however, the amounts apportioned remain in effect even if the President enacts the full-year appropriation 
bill prior to the end of the short-term CR period. 

 

For example, a CR ending November 15th would result in a pro-rata amount of 12.60% (46 days/365 days, 
non-leap year) apportioned. If the CR is extended through December 20th an additional 9.59% (35 days/365 
days) would be apportioned, bringing the total percentage of the rate of operations apportioned to 22.19% 
since October 1st. If full-year appropriations are enacted on December 15th (before the end of the CR 
period), on December 15th you are automatically apportioned the 30 days' worth of the enacted full year 
appropriation (30 days/365 days = 8.22%) pursuant to the automatic authority provided by this section. 
Therefore, from October 1st through January 15th you have been apportioned a total of 30.41%, 22.19% of 
the rate for operations provided by the short-term CR from the OMB CR Bulletin plus 8.22% of the final 
appropriated amount pursuant to this section. 

 

The automatic apportionment does not apply to any budgetary resource provided by authorizing legislation 
or by reauthorizations that affect appropriated resources, such as the Farm Bill or surface transportation 
reauthorizations. Additionally, pursuant to sections 120.7 and 120.56, automatic apportionment does not 
apply to carryover amounts, which are automatically apportioned at zero until an account-specific 
apportionment is approved for such amounts. 

 

Pending OMB's approval of the first written account-specific apportionment request for full-year enacted 
appropriations for the current fiscal year, agencies are automatically apportioned 30-calendar days of funds 
calculated using the above rate. Note that the pro-rata share calculation does not include rescissions and 
other transactions used to calculate the pro-rata share pursuant to the OMB CR Bulletin. The 30-calendar 
days begin on the date of enactment of a full-year appropriation, except for after a lapse in appropriations 
(see below). If OMB has not approved a request on the 30th calendar day after enactment, agencies are 
automatically apportioned another 30 calendar days of funds using the above rate. This repeats until an 
account-specific apportionment is approved. Once a written account-specific apportionment is approved 
by OMB, the automatic apportionment ceases to remain in effect. 

 

If an agency has not yet submitted its first written account-specific apportionment request to OMB within 
the first 30-day automatic apportionment period, the agency must provide an explanation of the delay to its 
OMB representative. 

 

Under this automatic apportionment, funds are apportioned as "lump-sum". Agencies have the flexibility 
to record the "lump-sum" as either Category A or Category B, whichever is applicable to the account. If the 
funds are Category A, the "lump-sum" is automatically apportioned to the quarter in which the full year 
appropriation is enacted. If the funds are Category B, the "lump-sum" is automatically apportioned as a 
single Category B line. Additionally, all of the footnotes and conditions placed on prior year apportionments 
or last-approved apportionments remain in effect. This guidance applies strictly to all budgetary resources 
provided by annual full-year appropriations bills, including supplemental appropriations for the current 
year, and not other budgetary resources. 

 

For accounts that have appropriations language with permissive carveouts ("up to" or "not more than" or 
"not to exceed") for a specific amount with a different period of availability (POA) than the main 
appropriation, the automatic apportionment applies to the main appropriation and not to the carveout 
amount. Under this scenario the agency must execute a non-expenditure transfer to move the carveout 
amount and then process an account-specific apportionment to obligate those specific transferred resources. 
See Exhibit 120T for further guidance on how to prepare the apportionment in these scenarios. 

 


After a lapse in appropriations, the automatic apportionment of full-year appropriations is in effect the day 
the lapse occurred, not the date the President enacts the full-year appropriation. This situation only applies 
when a full-year appropriation follows a lapse in appropriations. 

 

If the full-year enacted appropriations are preceded by a short-term continuing resolution, see sections 
120.60 and 120.62 for further guidance on how to reflect the previous approved column on your first written 
account-specific apportionment request. 

AFTER YOU HAVE RECEIVED YOUR APPROVED APPORTIONMENT 

120.42 How should I execute the apportionment? 

 

You must execute your programs as apportioned and in accordance with all applicable laws. The 
authorization and / or appropriation language describes the purpose of the program(s) the TAFS will carry 
out, and may include guidance for you to follow in executing these programs. 

 

Your apportionment dictates how you must execute programs and control funds. You may only obligate 
funds within: 

 

• budgetary resources apportioned and realized; 


 

• amounts apportioned by fiscal quarter (Category A); 


 

• amounts apportioned by program, project, or activity (Category B); 


 

• amounts apportioned by fiscal quarters and programs, projects, or activities (Category AB); and 


 

• guidance provided in OMB approved footnotes in the Application of Budgetary Resources section. 


120.43 What if I think that I may have obligated more than the amounts apportioned? 

 

You may have violated the Antideficiency Act (31 U.S.C. 1517(a)(1)). See section 145. 

120.44 Must I control funds below the apportionment level? 

 

Yes. Your agency's fund control regulations, as approved by OMB, dictate how you must control funds. 
See section 150. 

120.45 How should I allot once I receive an apportionment? 

 

The agency system of administrative control of funds must be designed to keep obligations and expenditures 
from exceeding apportionments and allotments or from exceeding budgetary resources available for 
obligation, whichever is smaller, so as to avoid Antideficiency Act violations. See section 150. 

120.46 How do I treat anticipated budgetary resources that are apportioned in the current fiscal 
year but not yet realized, and do I need to reapportion them once realized? 

 

Even when anticipated budgetary resources have been apportioned in the current fiscal year, you may not 
obligate against these resources before the resources have been realized (and, thus, you may not obligate 
against the resources in an amount that exceeds the amount that has been realized). For example, if OMB 
has apportioned anticipated budget authority from the agency's collection of user fees, you may not obligate 


against those user fees until you have collected them (and, thus, you may not incur obligations that exceed 
the amounts that have been collected). This guidance also applies to anticipated non-expenditure transfers 
of budgetary resources. The transferred resources cannot be obligated against until Treasury Fiscal Service 
has processed a non-expenditure transfer document and the resources are in the receiving account. 

 

Apportioned anticipated budgetary resources, once realized, do not need to be reapportioned unless the 
amount realized exceeds the conditions on the total amount apportioned (see section 120.49). However, 
this only applies during the current fiscal year. For instance, if you had anticipated resources apportioned 
in the prior fiscal year for a reimbursable agreement but it was not realized, you will need to reapportion 
those anticipated resources in the next fiscal year. 

120.47 What is the relationship between the apportionment and the Funds Control System? 

 

The agency's system of administrative control of funds (see section 150 and Appendix H) should be 
designed to keep obligations from exceeding apportioned amounts, allotments, suballotments, and other 
administrative subdivisions of funds. This funds-control system also should be designed to keep obligations 
from exceeding budgetary resources that have been realized, and should be able to track obligations by 
program reporting categories used in the apportionment. 

 

The funds-control system must track obligations to make sure obligated levels do not exceed: 

 

• budgetary resources apportioned; 


 

• amounts provided by fiscal quarter in Category A; 


 

• amounts provided by program in Category B; 


 

• amounts provided by program in Category AB; and 


 

• other restrictions placed in OMB approved footnotes in the Application of Budgetary Resources 
section. 


 

If the funds-control system cannot provide this control, the agency must develop other methods to perform 
this function, e.g., developing monitoring reports. 

 

Since footnotes are not often implemented in an agency's financial system, the agency's budget, finance, 
and procurement staff need to be aware of and understand the directions and restrictions provided in 
footnotes. 

 

Your agency's accounting system must fully support the funds-control system (see Appendix H). 

 

CHANGES TO PREVIOUSLY APPROVED APPORTIONMENTS FOR 
THE CURRENT FISCAL YEAR 

120.48 What types of situations could require me to request a new apportionment? 

 

Submit a reapportionment request to OMB when: 

 

• Your budgetary resources have increased since your previous apportionment for the fiscal year 
(e.g., actual reimbursements differ significantly from estimates, newly enacted legislation provides 
more resources); 



• You want to obligate against the increased resources in the same fiscal year; 


 

• The increase is not covered by the exceptions in sections 120.49 or 120.50 (if applicable); 


 

• Your obligations against an indefinite appropriation for the remainder of the fiscal year are 
expected to exceed the amount estimated on the latest approved apportionment and the latest 
approved apportionment does not include an “A” footnote in the OMB Action column that 
automatically apportions the necessary increase in budgetary resources; or 


 

• Programmatic changes result in a need for an adjustment in the apportionment. 


 

In order to allow time for action by OMB, submit such requests well in advance of the time that the revised 
amounts, to be apportioned, are needed for obligation (an apportionment for a specific time period, such as 
for a specific quarter of the current fiscal year, may not be changed after the end of that period). 

 

When emergencies, such as those involving the safety of human life or the protection of property, require 
immediate action, you may request, and OMB may approve, a reapportionment by e-mail or other non-
web-based apportionment system methods (section 120.16). As soon thereafter as it is practical, submit 
apportionment requests reflecting such action. 

 

For credit program and financing TAFSs, submit an apportionment request for subsidy reestimates at the 
beginning of each fiscal year (starting with the fiscal year following the year in which a disbursement is 
made) as long as the loans are outstanding (see sections 185.17 and 185.18). Also submit an apportionment 
request for subsidy modifications when the modification is approved by OMB (see section 185.21). Credit 
program and financing TAFSs are also subject to the standard reapportionment requirements described 
above (see sections 185.14 through 185.21 for further guidance on apportioning credit accounts). 

 

Submit an apportionment request within 10 calendar days after enactment of an appropriation, substantive 
act providing budget authority, where such authority is enacted after the first apportionment for the year 
has been made (except as specified in section 120.49). We encourage you to begin preparation of 
apportionments and related materials as soon as the House and Senate have reached agreement on funding 
levels. 

 

In some cases, you will need to submit your first apportionment request before the unobligated balance 
brought forward has been precisely determined. If the unobligated balance brought forward, as shown on 
the latest approved apportionment schedule, is larger than the unobligated balance at the end of the 
preceding year, as reported on the final SF 133 for that year, and the difference is larger than the amount 
specified in section 120.49, OMB must approve the apportionment request before you can obligate the 
additional funds. 

120.49 What adjustments can I make without submitting a reapportionment request? 

 

After the first apportionment for the fiscal year, downward adjustments of any amount to budgetary 
resources, including anticipated amounts, do not need to be reapportioned, unless specifically required by 
OMB or, at the agency's discretion, for funds control purposes. However, if the decrease applies to amounts 
apportioned in Category C, and as a result you need to increase the amounts apportioned to Category B(s) 
or current Cat A or A/B(s) lines, you will have to submit a reapportionment to reflect the reallocation from 
Category C. Apportioned anticipated budgetary resources, once realized in the current fiscal year of the 
apportionment, do not need to be reapportioned unless the amount realized exceeds the conditions on the 
total amount apportioned, as noted below. 

 


Although an apportionment is not required to execute a non-expenditure transfer out of a TAFS, for funds 
control purposes a reapportionment should follow shortly after such a transfer is executed to reflect the non-
expenditure transfer and reduce the budgetary resources of the giving account accordingly. 

 

After the first apportionment for the fiscal year, unless OMB determines otherwise, you may adjust 
apportioned amounts upwards without submitting a reapportionment request by up to $400,000 or two 
percent of the amount of total budgetary resources, whichever is lower, to reflect: 

 

• Upward adjustments in the amount of unobligated balances brought forward; 


 

• Increases in amounts of budget authority transfers or balance transfers; or 


 

• Increases in amounts of actual budgetary resources that are realized above anticipated amounts. 


 

You may only adjust apportioned amounts when OMB apportions either a single program, project, or 
activity (Category B) or, if the total amount is apportioned, by quarter (Category A or Category AB). When 
amounts are apportioned by quarter, you must adjust the apportioned amounts in the quarter that is current 
when you record the resource. For example, if anticipated collections were apportioned in the third quarter 
but the increased amount above the anticipated collections (still within the lower of $400,000 or two 
percent) were not realized until the fourth quarter; record the resource in the fourth quarter, not the third. 
This guidance is not applicable when your resources are apportioned pursuant to an automatic 
apportionment. In those cases, you record the automatic apportionment of those resources in the quarter in 
which they are realized. 

 

If only the name of your apportioned account and/or bureau has changed, you do not need to submit a 
reapportionment to OMB. 

 

In credit financing TAFSs, additional amounts for the payment of interest to Treasury are automatically 
apportioned (section 185.19) if the amounts needed exceed your estimate on the most recent approved 
apportionment. 

 

You cannot make any upward adjustments under this section (downward adjustments are not affected) when 
OMB apportions funds for two or more categories on the same apportionment, such as Category A and 
Category B, or Category A and Category AB, or two or more Category Bs, etc. In these types of apportioned 
TAFSs, you must submit a reapportionment request to OMB or otherwise have prior OMB approval (e.g., 
through an OMB footnote in the Application of Budgetary Resources section that starts with the indicator 
of A) to adjust apportioned amounts upward. 

 

Apportionments are not required for transactions to send funds back to the Treasury, such as closing an 
account. 

120.50 What other types of adjustments can I request OMB to allow me to make without submitting 
a new apportionment request? 

 

You may make other specific types of adjustments to apportionments without submitting a reapportionment 
request if specified in a footnote in the Application of Budgetary Resources section (footnote indicator 
starts with letter A) on the most recently approved apportionment or otherwise approved in writing by 
OMB. For example, OMB may include on an approved apportionment a footnote (with a corresponding 
YES in the Line Split column of the Adjustment Authority Provided row) which states that, to the extent 
provided in law, actual earned reimbursements are automatically apportioned without further OMB action. 

 


In order to facilitate OMB approval of your apportionment request, your apportionment request must 
indicate that you have previously received, or are requesting, OMB approval to use this authority. 

120.51 What is the status of previously approved apportionments when a new apportionment is 
approved in the same fiscal year? 

 

Each new apportionment in a fiscal year supersedes previous apportionment actions taken earlier that year. 

 

APPORTIONMENTS BY TIME PERIOD 

120.52 Will OMB apportion funds into future fiscal years? 

 

Yes. OMB will sometimes apportion multi-year/no-year funds into future fiscal years using a Category C. 
OMB cannot apportion annual funds into a future fiscal year. 

 

The Congress appropriates funds on a multi-year and no-year basis with the expectation that the funds will 
be obligated over more than one fiscal year. OMB will apportion these TAFSs beyond the current fiscal 
year where financial requirements are known in advance and it makes programmatic sense to do so. 

 

When you plan to obligate amounts appropriated in a no-year or multi-year TAFSs over more than one 
fiscal year, make sure that the apportionment request shows the full amount appropriated and available for 
obligation in the current fiscal year. The request must also include planned obligations for the current year 
and amounts planned for obligation in future fiscal years. 

 

Note: apportionments last no longer than one fiscal year. Funds must be apportioned at the beginning of 
each fiscal year in accordance with sections 120.7 and 120.56. 

120.53 When do I use lines 6180 (withheld pending rescission) or 6181 (deferred)? 

 

Do not use these lines on your apportionment without first consulting with your OMB representative. These 
lines are used to reflect a proposed rescission or deferral under the authority of the Impoundment Control 
Act of 1974. If these lines are used on your apportionment, you must submit a rescission or deferral report 
that outlines the reasons for and the effects of the proposed action. See section 112 for further information 
on the use of these lines and preparing rescission and deferral reports. 

120.54 Can OMB reapportion a past period? 

 

No. Apportionments are never subject to change after the period for which the apportionment was made 
(e.g., a prior fiscal year or a past quarter time period in the current fiscal year). 

 

For apportionments with Category A amounts, once funds are apportioned, the apportionment cannot be 
retroactively changed to show a different apportioned amount if that quarter has passed. For instance, if 
your first quarter apportioned amount was overestimated but in a subsequent quarter the realized actuals 
were much lower than the estimated amount, you would do the following on the reapportionment: 

 

• First quarter apportioned amount remains as previously apportioned; 


 

• Current quarter (i.e., second, third or fourth) reflect a negative amount so as to net to the correct 
total amount that needs to be reapportioned. 


 

See exhibit 120K for an example. 


Here are examples of where OMB is not reapportioning a past period: apportionments that simply reflect a 
past automatic apportionment on a subsequent account-specific apportionment, such as the initial account-
specific apportionment following a continuing resolution (because the apportionment was in fact in effect 
during the past quarter time period); or where budget authority has been expressly appropriated to cover 
prior obligations. 

 

See section 120.41 for additional guidance about the automatic apportionment of budgetary resources when 
a full-year appropriations Act follows a lapse in appropriations. 

120.55 Do unobligated resources apportioned in earlier time periods of the same fiscal year 
remain available? 

 

Yes. When budgetary resources are apportioned for time periods of less than a fiscal year (e.g., fiscal 
quarters), any apportioned amounts that have not been obligated at the end of any period will remain 
available for obligation through the remainder of the current fiscal year without being reapportioned, unless 
otherwise specified on the apportionment. However, this rule does not apply to unobligated balances 
apportioned during a short-term continuing resolution that is followed immediately by a lapse in 
appropriations (see section 123.16). 

120.56 Must I request that funds apportioned in one fiscal year be apportioned in the next fiscal 
year if the funds were not obligated and remain available? 

 

Yes. When budgetary resources remain available (unexpired) beyond the end of a fiscal year, you must 
submit a new apportionment request for the upcoming fiscal year. You cannot incur obligations in any year 
absent an approved apportionment for that year. For instance, if OMB apportioned $1 million for a no-year 
TAFSs in FY 2018 and you obligated no funds, you must still submit an FY 2019 request and receive OMB 
approval of that request before incurring obligations in FY 2019. Until you receive an account-specific 
apportionment from OMB, the amount of carryover apportioned is zero dollars. In addition, apportioned 
anticipated or estimated resources are not available for obligation until the resources are realized. 

120.57 What is the status of approved apportionments from a previous fiscal year on apportionments 
in the current fiscal year? 

 

New apportionment action for a fiscal year is independent of all apportionment actions of the previous year, 
including the apportionment of amounts under Category C in the previous fiscal year. 

120.58 How does the last approved apportionment govern the actions a TAFS takes when the TAFS 
enters the expired phase? 

 

Every annual and multi-year TAFSs, as well as some no-year TAFSs, has a finite period of time to incur 
an obligation; this is called the unexpired phase. OMB only apportions TAFSs in the unexpired phase. 

 

When shifting to the expired phase, a TAFS can only make adjustments to obligations made in the unexpired 
phase. Activity in the expired phase of a TAFS is governed by the last approved apportionment, including 
apportioned footnotes in the OMB Action column of the Application of Budgetary Resources section. 

 

In some instances, there may be a subset of resources in a no-year TAFS that are no longer available for 
new obligations. This does not impact the phase (e.g.., expired or unexpired) of the entire TAFS. 

 


APPORTIONMENTS AFFECTED BY A CONTINUING RESOLUTION (CR) 

120.59 During a CR, what happens to TAFSs that were apportioned before the start of a fiscal year 
(e.g., no-year TAFSs)? 

 

When budgetary resources (e.g., unobligated balances, spending authority from offsetting collections, 
anticipated transfers) are apportioned prior to the start of a fiscal year, those apportionments remain in effect 
even if a CR is enacted, unless otherwise directed by OMB. 

 

However, you must submit a new apportionment request to OMB if: 

 

• The CR changes the funding level or alters the program mix that OMB apportioned (e.g., the 
Congress rescinds unobligated balances during the CR period or zero-funds a program that OMB 
previously apportioned); or 


 

• Changes occur that affect the budgetary resources apportioned as described in sections 120.48 
through 120.50 (e.g., actual reimbursements differ significantly from estimates). 


 

The automatic apportionment approved by OMB after enactment of a short-term CR (OMB CR Bulletin) 
covers only the budgetary resources provided by the short-term CR. Some TAFSs may receive funds 
provided by the CR in addition to budgetary resources provided by other acts. These TAFSs receive both 
the automatic apportionment for the CR funds and any budgetary resources apportioned before the start of 
the fiscal year (e.g., unobligated balance carried forward). 

 

If you chose to seek reapportionment of the TAFS during the CR period and you and the RMO agree not 
to reflect the amounts from the CR in the reapportionment, then you must include a footnote in the 
reapportionment to indicate that the account is also receiving apportioned resources from the CR. See 
section 123.17 for the footnote language. 

120.60 After a CR has been replaced by a full-year enacted appropriation, what do I show in the 
Previous Approved column? 

 

Unless otherwise requested by your RMO, in the Previous Approved column, show all budgetary resources 
and apportioned amounts since the start of the fiscal year through the last day of the CR (in accordance with 
the most recent OMB CR Bulletin on the "Apportionment of the Continuing Resolution(s) for Fiscal Year 
20XX") plus the amounts automatically apportioned pursuant to section 120.41. For example, amounts on 
line 1100, discretionary appropriations, should show the short-term CR's calculated rate for operations. 
Additionally, a footnote on line 1134 Appropriations precluded from obligation (or line 1135 for a special 
or trust fund TAFS), should state the following: "Amount on line 1134 (or line 1135) has been adjusted 
pursuant to OMB CR Bulletin XX-XX and Circular A-11 section 120.41." (see exhibit 120G). For instance, 
if budgetary resources such as unobligated balances were apportioned by OMB and the TAFS also received 
automatically apportioned CR funds via the OMB CR Bulletin(s) and section 120.41, you must show both 
types of budgetary resources on your apportionment request. 

 

If you were apportioned under the CR with a POA that was changed in the full-year enacted appropriations, 
see section 120.62 for further apportionment guidance. 

120.61 After a short-term CR has been replaced by a full-year enacted appropriation, what do I 
show in the agency request column? 

 

In the agency request column, show all budgetary resources and application of budgetary resources for the 
entire fiscal year, beginning from the start of the fiscal year. See section 120.54 and exhibit 120G. See 


Exhibit 120H if you received OMB concurrence during the short-term CR period to record your lump-sum 
automatic apportionment as Category A. 

 

Note that while an account is under the automatic apportionment authority in section 120.41, GTAS 
reporting will not show any amounts on line 1134 unlike the previously approved column of the first 
apportionment post-CR. Instead, GTAS will report those amounts on line 2403 in the Status of Budgetary 
Resources section of a SF 133. 

120.62 What do I do if the full-year enacted appropriation changes the period of availability of funds 
apportioned under a short-term CR? 

 

If the POA of funds under a short-term CR was changed by the full-year enacted appropriations, you must 
submit two account-specific apportionments. Under the short-term CR, you were apportioned for that 
specific POA and all obligations were valid; however, the CR states that expenditures made pursuant to the 
CR shall be charged to the applicable appropriation, fund, or authorization whenever a bill in which such 
applicable appropriation, fund, or authorization is contained is enacted into law. 

 

In the situation where the entire POA of the TAFS changed in the final bill, you must prepare the following 
apportionments. In this scenario the CR POA was annual and the final enacted appropriation POA was 
multi-year. 

 

• For the POA that was under the CR, you will reflect "0" on lines 1100 discretionary appropriation 
and 1134 appropriation excluded from obligation (or 1135 for special and trust funds) and place 
the following "A" footnote on line 6190 total budgetary resources available in the previously 
approved column only: 


 

 "Under the FY 2020 short-term continuing resolution (CR) (P.L. XXX-XXX, as 
amended) this account was appropriated as an annual TAFS (put TAFS number here) 
and was apportioned by OMB Bulletin 19-XX. The full-year FY 2020 appropriation 
(P.L. XXX-XXX) enacted the funding within a multi-year TAFS (put TAFS number 
here) and was automatically apportioned via OMB Circular A-11 section 120.41. 
Pursuant to section XXX (check CR for actual section number, e.g., 105) of the FY 
2020 CR, any obligations/outlays made with the previous annual appropriation shall 
now be redistributed (or recasted) to the new multi-year TAFS (put TAFS number 
here)." 


 

• For the POA that is enacted in the full-year bill, you will reflect the CR (lines 1100 discretionary 
appropriations and 1134 appropriation excluded from obligation or 1135 for special or trust funds) 
in the previous approved column (see section 120.60 for "B" footnote on line 1134 or 1135) and 
place the following "A" footnote on line 6190 total budgetary resources available: 


 

 "Under the FY 2020 short-term continuing resolution (CR) (P.L. XXX-XXX, as 
amended) this account was appropriated as an annual TAFS (put TAFS number here) 
and was apportioned by OMB Bulletin 19-XX. The full-year 2020 appropriation (P.L. 
XXX-XXX) enacted the funding within this multi-year TAFS (put TAFS number here) 
and was automatically apportioned via OMB Circular A-11 section 120.41. Pursuant 
to section XXX (check CR for actual section number, e.g., 105) of the FY 2020 CR, 
any obligations/outlays made with the previous annual appropriation shall now be 
redistributed (or recasted) to this new multi-year TAFS (put TAFS number here)." 


 

There may be cases where the POA is only changed partially by the full-year enacted appropriations bill. 
If this occurs, please contact your OMB representative for guidance. 


WHAT OTHER IMPORTANT THINGS DO I NEED TO KNOW ABOUT APPORTIONMENTS? 

120.63 What types of resources are apportioned by OMB? 

 

The following resources are apportioned by OMB: 

 

• Budgetary resources; 


 

• Non-budgetary resources (such as foreign currency, quotas, etc.); and 


 

• An agency's other authority (pursuant to statutory authority) in whatever form it may take. 


120.64 Are all apportionments based on authority to incur obligations? 

 

OMB usually apportions the budgetary resources of a TAFS with respect to the authority to incur new 
obligations. 

 

However, OMB may apportion budgetary resources on a pre-obligation basis, such as "commitments," 
which, if used, are made before obligations are incurred. If OMB apportions on a basis other than 
obligations, you should continue to include your usual obligations in the GTAS system, but in addition, you 
must report a GTAS footnote regarding the status of the non-obligation apportioned items, i.e., footnote the 
amount of "commitments" incurred against the amount shown on the apportionment. 

120.65 How do I treat extensions of the availability of unobligated balances in an apportionment? 

 

Reappropriations (see section 20.4(h)) are recorded on lines 1105 Discretionary Reappropriation or 1204 
Mandatory Reappropriation. For example, an apportionment for FY 2019 should reflect an estimate of the 
amount to be reappropriated from the estimated expiring FY 2018 balances. A reapportionment may be 
required after the actual amount of the expiring balances is known. You may wish to reflect these amounts 
on either lines 1134 Discretionary appropriations precluded from obligation (use for only general fund 
TAFS; use line 1135 for special or trust fund TAFS) or 1235 Mandatory appropriations precluded from 
obligation, until an appropriate time after the required reprogramming notice has been transmitted to the 
Congress. 

 

Balance transfer amounts from expired to unexpired funds, are reflected on line 1012 Unobligated balance 
transfers between expired and unexpired accounts. 

 

HANDLING DEFICIENCIES IN APPORTIONMENTS 

120.66 When and how do I submit apportionments anticipating the need for the Congress to enact 
supplemental budget authority? 

 

Submit requests anticipating the need for the Congress to enact supplemental budget authority only under 
exceptional circumstances as authorized by law. The Antideficiency Act (31 U.S.C. 1515) permits 
apportionments to be made on such a deficient-rate basis that indicates the need for the Congress to enact 
supplemental budget authority only when: 

 

• Laws enacted after submission to the Congress of the estimates for an appropriation require an 
expenditure beyond administrative control. 


 

 


• Emergencies arise involving: 


 

 (1) the safety of human life; 


 

 (2) the protection of property; or 


 

 (3) the immediate welfare of individuals in cases where an appropriation that would 
allow the United States to pay, or contribute to, amounts required to be paid to 
individuals in specific amounts fixed by law or under formulas prescribed by law, is 
insufficient. 


 

When you submit a requested apportionment that indicates a necessity for the enactment of supplemental 
appropriations, include the following notation on the apportionment request: 

 

"This apportionment request indicates a necessity for a supplemental appropriation now estimated at 
$_____________." 

 

Submit the apportionment request to OMB along with your agency head's determination of the reasons for 
a deficiency apportionment, as required by law (31 U.S.C. 1515). The statement of necessity will read as 
follows: 

 

"I hereby determine that it is necessary to request apportionment of the appropriation '(appropriation title)' 
on a basis that indicates the necessity for a supplemental estimate of appropriations, because .... [cite one 
of the allowable reasons mentioned above]." 

 

Usually, you will reflect the need for a supplemental appropriation in quarterly apportionments by making 
the request for the fourth quarter less than the amount that will be required. For apportionments by 
activities, verify that the amount requested for each activity provides for continuing that activity until the 
supplemental appropriation is expected to be enacted and become available. OMB approval of requests for 
a deficiency apportionment allows the agency to operate at a deficient rate of operations, but does not 
authorize the agency to exceed the total amount of the existing appropriation and of the resources that OMB 
has apportioned within a TAFS. 

 

Fully justify the amount of any anticipated supplemental appropriation. Action on the apportionment 
request does not commit OMB to the amount of the supplemental appropriation that will be recommended 
subsequently to the President or transmitted to the Congress. 

 

A deficiency apportionment cannot be requested to provide obligational authority in the event of a lapse of 
appropriations. The obligational authority for such a circumstance is provided by 31 U.S.C. 1342, and is 
automatically apportioned via section 124.5. 

 

PROGRAM REPORTING CATEGORIES 

120.67 What is the purpose of program reporting categories? 

 
Program reporting categories show how agencies will report obligations on their SF 133 Reports on Budget 
Execution and Budgetary Resources (see section 130). Absent program reporting categories, agencies 
report obligations on their SF 133 reports in accordance with their approved apportionments. For instance, 
if OMB uses a single Category B project on the apportionment and does not use program reporting 
categories, the SF 133 report will show obligations on a single line. 

 


You should use program reporting categories when you want obligations reported at a more detailed and 
programmatically meaningful manner than the apportioned lines would otherwise result in. If program 
reporting categories were used in the case above, the SF 133 report would show obligations on two or (most 
likely) more lines. For instance, if a Department of the Interior account had a single Category B project but 
program categories for maintaining land resources and protecting endangered species, the 
SF 133 report would distinguish obligations by these categories. While program reporting categories result 
in more detailed reporting on obligations, they do not control what the agency can obligate for these 
categories. 

 

Most TAFSs do not use program reporting categories. 

120.68 Do my estimates of program reporting category obligations limit the amount I can obligate? 

 

No. Program reporting categories are not used to apportion funds, and are not subject to the Antideficiency 
Act. 

120.69 What do OMB and the agency need to do to start using program reporting categories? 

 

OMB and agencies work together to determine what program reporting categories agencies will report 
upon. Program reporting categories should be based on elements that agencies track in their financial 
systems. In some cases, you may choose to report upon the same programs that appear in the Program and 
Financing Schedule of the President's Budget. 

 

Because the level of reporting is lower level than the apportionment categories, program reporting 
categories should be identified in advance of the beginning of a fiscal year if at all possible, and in advance 
of the time that agencies produce their first apportionment requests for the year. The reason is that agencies 
need time to place entries in their financial systems to allow them to track these program categories 
throughout the year. One reason is that large numbers of staff including timekeepers, procurement staff, 
administrative officers, and others need to document the new program reporting categories, and train 
program office staff on how to use the new categories. In addition, agencies may need time to update their 
systems to extract the data. 

120.70 How do I fill in the program reporting category tab? 

 

The apportionment user's guide that appears on the support\links tab of the apportionment system describes 
how to fill in the program reporting category tab. The URL for the apportionment system is: 

https://apportionment.max.gov. 

120.71 Why does OMB send the names of program reporting categories and Category B projects to 
Treasury for use in GTAS? 

 

OMB sends program reporting categories from approved apportionments to the Treasury Department's 
Bureau of the Fiscal Service, which operates the GTAS system that agencies use to report their SF 133 
budget execution information. When reporting their obligations, GTAS provides agencies with the list of 
program reporting categories to report upon; these are the same program reporting categories that OMB 
provides from the apportionment attachments. 

 

For those TAFSs that use Category B projects but do not use program reporting categories, OMB sends 
Fiscal Service the list of Category B projects for use in GTAS reporting. 

 

OMB sends this information to Fiscal Service so OMB can use automated tools to align program reporting 
categories and Category B projects on the apportionments to the budget execution reports. 


 

 

Program Reporting Category Projected, Annual Obligations 
080X130960011Salaries400,000080X130960012All Other80,000080 Cat A, Sub-total480,000080X130960113Research -- Air8,880,000080X130960114Research -- Water4,000,000080X130960115Research -- All OtherN/A080 Research, Sub-total12,880,000080X130960126Development -- Air5,450,000080X130960127Development -- Water4,000,000080X130960128Development -- All OtherN/ADevelopment, Sub-total9,450,000Note: Program reporting categories are not used to apportion funds, and are not subject to 31 USC 1517.
PROGRAM REPORTING CATEGORIES FORMATProgram Reporting CategoriesAgency IdentifierAvailability TypeBeginning POAEnding POASF 132 LineReport Cat No.
Main AccountNote how the program reporting categories relate to 
apportioned amounts in Exhibit 120D's Office of the 
Secretary apportionment. 
When the Report Cat No has a number 
between 1 -100, the stub will be sent to 
the GTAS system for use in budget 
execution reporting. 
You may also include additional rows 
where the Report Cat No is blank. In this 
example, these rows serve as sub-totals.
Do not use program reporting categories that are 
identical to Category B projects. The simple rule is 
that you use two or more reporting categories for 
each Cat B project.
Check with OMB on 
whether you need to put in 
projected, annual 
obligations.
Note also that the amounts in 
this column do not need to 
add to the total amount on 
the apportioned lines. 


Line NoLine 
SplitLine DescriptionPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency 
RequestAgency FootnoteOMB 
ActionOMB FootnoteMemo ObligationsDepartment of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: Salaries and Expenses (003-04-1109)
TAFS: 080-20xx-20xx-0137 
IterNo1Last Approved Apportionment: N/A, First Request of yearRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1100BA: Disc: Appropriation7,400,0007,400,0001130BA: Disc: Appropriations permanently reduced-1,000-1,0001840BA: Mand: Spending auth:Antic colls, reimbs, other403,000403,0001920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)07,802,0007,802,00060011st quarter1,952,0001,952,00060022nd quarter1,950,0001,950,00060033rd quarter1,950,0001,950,00060044th quarter1,825,0001,825,0006011Prairie Restoration Fund125,000A1125,000A16190Total budgetary resources available07,802,0007,802,000Exhibit Notes:
1)
2) 
Funds provided by Public Law XXX-XXXPer section 120.41, newly enacted appropriations are automatically apportioned for a temporary period. If you choose to leave the previous approved column 
blank and were under an automatic apportionment(s), then state so in an "A" footnote on line 6190 in in that column.
FY 20xx ApportionmentOne-Year Appropriation—First Apportionment for the Current Fiscal YearThis exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1.
Display the text of any 
footnotes in a separate 
tab in your Excel file.
Identify in the header the law(s) 
providing the budget authority. 
On the initial apportionment, 
this line entry represents the 
amount of appropriations 
becoming available on or after 
October 1 of the fiscal year for 
which the apportionment is 
submitted. 
The inclusion of estimates in 
determining the amounts 
available for apportionment 
does not authorize you to 
obligate amounts anticipated for 
the rest of the year (see section 
145.6).
This entry includes any funds 
not available for obligation 
pursuant to a specific provision 
in law. Identify the public law 
containing the restriction in a 
"B" footnote. 31 U.S.C 1512 
and the Impoundment Control 
Act are not valid authorizing 
citations.
The total amount on line 1920 
must equal the total amount on 
line 6190.
Leave the "Previous 
Approved" column blank on 
the first apportionment of the 
Include an estimate of all amounts you 
anticipate will become available under 
existing law in the fiscal year for which 
the schedule is submitted. Do not include 
anticipated unenacted supplemental 
appropriations and rescission proposals.
If you leave "Previous Approved" 
column blank on initial 
apportionments but were under 
automatic apportionment(s), then 
state so in an "A" footnote on line 
6190 of the "Previous Approved" 
column.


Line NoLine 
SplitLine DescriptionPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: R & D (003-04-1109)
TAFS: 080-X-1309IterNo1Last Approved Apportionment: N/A, First Request of yearRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1000DEUnob Bal: Brought forward, Oct 11,180,0001,180,000[line split = E for estimate]
[line split = A for actual balance]
1061Unob Bal: Antic recov of prior year unpd and pd obl150,000150,0001100BA: Disc: Appropriation 25,000,00025,000,00017401BA: Disc: Spending auth:Antic colls, reimbs, other300,000300,00017402BA: Disc: Spending auth:Antic colls, reimbs, other100,000100,0001920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)026,730,00026,730,00060011st quarter120,000120,00060022nd quarter120,000120,00060033rd quarter120,000120,00060044th quarter120,000120,0006011Research12,800,00012,800,0006012Development of Products9,450,0009,450,0006170CY+14,000,000A24,000,000A26190Total budgetary resources available026,730,00026,730,000Exhibit Notes:
1)
2)
Funds provided by Public Law XXX-XXXFY 20xx ApportionmentNo-Year Appropriation—First Apportionment for the Current Fiscal YearPer section 120.41, newly enacted appropriations are automatically apportioned for a temporary period. If you choose to leave the previous approved column 
blank and were under an automatic apportionment(s), then state so in an "A" footnote on line 6190 in in that column.
This exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1.
If the account must be apportioned before the actual 
unobligated balance is known, enter an estimated 
amount on this line. Type 'E' in the line split 
column. If adjustments are subsequently required, 
submit a reapportionment, except as provided in 
section 120.49.
Include only amounts 
expected to be received 
and to become available 
without further 
congressional action.
Display the text of any 
footnotes in a separate tab 
in your Excel file.
Use this line to report expected cancellations or 
downward adjustments of prior year unpaid and paid 
obligations reported in prior years for unexpired 
accounts.
No-year and multi-year TAFS can have apportioned 
amounts in future fiscal years (Category C). When 
using line 6170, provide the future fiscal years.
Identify in the header the law(s) 
providing the budget authority. 
If you leave "Previous 
Approved" column blank on 
initial apportionments but were 
under automatic 
apportionment(s), then state so in 
an "A" footnote on line 6190.


 Line NoLine 
SplitLine DescriptionPrevious ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: R & D (003-04-1109)
TAFS: 080-X-1309IterNo2Last Approved Apportionment: 9/10/CYRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutYESAdjustment Authority provided1000DEUnob Bal: Brought forward, Oct 11,298,000DA[line split = DE for estimated balances of discretionary]1,610,0001,610,000[line split = DA for actual balance of discretionary]
1061Unob Bal: Antic recov of prior year unpd/pd obl150,000150,000150,0001100BA: Disc: Appropriation 25,000,00025,000,00025,000,0001130BA: Disc: Appropriations permanently reduced-200,000-200,0001700BA: Disc: Spending auth: Collected95,00095,00017401BA: Disc: Spending auth:Antic colls, reimbs, other300,000205,000205,00017402BA: Disc: Spending auth:Antic colls, reimbs, other100,000100,000100,000 
1920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)26,848,00026,960,00026,960,00060011st quarter120,000 120,000120,00036,00060022nd quarter120,000 120,000120,00060033rd quarter120,000 120,000120,00060044th quarter120,000 120,000120,0006011Research16,800,00012,880,00012,880,0006012Development of Products9,568,0009,600,0009,600,0001,348,2506170CY +14,000,0004,000,0006190Total budgetary resources available26,848,00026,960,000A126,960,000A1Exhibit Notes:
1)
2)
3)Exhibit 130C illustrates the SF 133 for this account.
No-Year Appropriation—ReapportionmentFY 20xx ApportionmentUnless OMB determines otherwise, when amounts are automatically apportioned (see section 120.50), and there is a subsequent need for reapportionment, reflect 
adjustments previously made as automatic apportionments in the "Previous Approved" column. In such cases, footnote what changes were automatically apportioned.
This exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1. 
Funds provided by Public Law XXX-XXXDisplay the text of any footnotes 
in a separate tab in your Excel 
file.
No-year and multi-year TAFS can have apportioned amounts 
in future fiscal years (Category C). When using line 6170, 
provide the future fiscal years.
On a reapportionment, 
this entry will include 
enacted appropriations, 
amounts certified by 
Treasury warrant of 
indefinite appropriations, 
any enacted 
supplemental 
appropriation, and any 
appropriated receipts in 
special and trust funds. 
See Appendix F for 
applicable line numbers.
If you need to reapportion after 
final unobligated balances are 
determined, change the line split 
from E to A. For more information 
about when a reapportionment is 
necessary, please see section 
120.49.
Anticipated 
resources should 
be adjusted to 
actual resources on 
subsequent 
apportionments.
Identify in the header the law(s) 
providing the budget authority. 


 Line NoLine 
SplitLine DescriptionPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency 
RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: Salaries and Expenses (003-04-1109)
TAFS: 080-20xx-20xx-0137IterNo1Last Approved Apportionment: N/A, First Request of yearRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1100BA: Disc: Appropriation24,000,000B124,000,000B11134BA: Disc: Appropriations precluded from obligation-22,030,000B2-22,030,000B21740BA: Disc: Spending auth:Antic colls, reimbs, other1,348,2601,348,260 
1920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)03,318,2603,318,26060011st quarter1,348,260A31,348,260A360022nd quarter0060033rd quarter0060044th quarter006011Lump Sum1,970,0001,970,0006190Total budgetary resources available03,318,2603,318,260Exhibit Notes:
1)
2)
One-Year Appropriations Under Continuing Resolution (CR)
FY 20xx ApportionmentGenerally, the OMB CR Bulletin will automatically apportion funds made available by a CR without requiring you to submit an account-specitic apportionment 
request (see section 123.3, 120.59). However, you may submit, or OMB may require you to submit a request.
This exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1.
Funds provided by Public Law XXX-XXXDisplay the text of any 
footnotes in a separate 
tab in your Excel file.
Identify in the header the law(s) providing the budget authority. If a 
CR is extended multiple times, include the citation of first CR "as 
amended" (not the subsequent amendments). However, if a new, 
separate CR is passed (e.g. after a lapse in appropriations), cite the 
new CR as well as the first CR.
Note that funds made available by the continuing resolution 
($24,000,000 -$22,030,000) are all apportioned as lump sum 
by the OMB short-term CR apportionment bulletin. 
You can either show the lump-sum amount in Cat B (as shown 
on line 6011) OR if you typically apportion Cat A, the entire 
lump-sum amount in the first quarter (line 6001). If the short-
term CR gets extended and enacted in a subsequent quarter, 
you would reflect the additive amount as lump-sum in the 
quarter current at that time.
For a short-term CR, show 
the amount of BA that is 
currently not provided 
under the given time 
period of the CR as a 
negative on line 1134 (for 
special or trust fund TAFS, 
you must use line 1135). 
(See section 123.2 for 
guidance.)
Even though a short-term CR is for part 
of a fiscal year, you still show the total 
annualized level (i.e., rate for operations) 
provided by the CR on line 1100 (not the 
pro-rata share apportioned for the time 
period of the CR).

 

 


 Line NoLine 
SplitLine DescriptionPrevious ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: R & D (003-04-1109)
TAFS: 080-X-1200IterNo2Last Approved Apportionment: 9/10/CY11/30/2018RptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1000DEUnob Bal: Brought forward, Oct 150,689,324DA[line split = DE for estimate of discretionary balances]60,000,00060,000,000[line split = DA for actual discretionary balances]
1100BA: Disc: Appropriation 24,000,00024,000,0001134BA: Disc: Appropriations precluded from obligation-22,030,000-22,030,0001700BA: Disc: Spending auth: Collected1,5001,50017401BA: Disc: Spending auth:Antic colls, reimbs, other1,000,7601,000,2601,000,26017402BA: Disc: Spending auth:Antic colls, reimbs, other349,000348,000348,000 
1920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)52,039,08463,319,76063,319,76060011st quarter13,009,771 22,320,44722,320,44760022nd quarter13,009,771 13,009,77113,009,77160033rd quarter13,009,771 13,009,77113,009,77160044th quarter13,009,771 13,009,77113,009,7716011Lump Sum1,970,0001,970,0001,425,5556190Total budgetary resources available52,039,084A163,319,76063,319,760Footnote A1: In addition to the amounts apportioned above, this account also received funds pursuant to Public Law XXX-XXX as automatically apportioned via OMB Bulletin XX-XX.
Exhibit Notes:
1)
2)
3)
Appropriations and Unobligated Balances Under a Continuing Resolution (CR)
You must submit a reapportionment request showing the final determination of unobligated balances to OMB as soon as it becomes known unless the amount is 
automatically apportioned by section 120.49. If you need to submit a reapportionment post October 1 and you do not reflect the amounts automatically apportioned by 
the OMB CR Bulletin, then you must footnote the apportionment accordingly (see section 123.18).
Generally, the OMB CR Bulletin will automatically apportion funds made available by a CR without requiring you to submit an account-specific apportionment request 
(see section 123.3, 120.59). However, you may submit, or OMB may require you to submit a request.
FY 20xx ApportionmentThis exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1. 
Funds provided by Public Law XXX-XXXIdentify in the header the law(s) providing the budget 
authority.
If you need to reapportion after final unobligated 
balances are determined, change the line split from E to 
A. For more information about when a reapportionment 
is necessary, please see section 120.49.
For a short-term CR, show 
the amount of BA that is 
currently not provided 
under the given time period 
of the CR as a negative on 
line 1134 (for special or 
trust fund TAFS, you must 
use line 1135). (See 
section 123.2 for 
guidance.)
Even though a short-term 
CR is for part of a fiscal 
year, you still show the 
total annualized level 
(e.g., rate for operations) 
provided by the CR on 
line 1100 (not the pro-rata 
share apportioned for the 
time period of the CR).
Change the line split from 
DE to DA when the final 
determination of 
unobligated balances is 
reported. If the amount 
on this line does not agree 
with the amounts: (a) 
reported on the final SF 
133 of the preceding year; 
(b) reported to the 
Treasury for inclusion in 
theTreasury Combined 
Statement Appendix; or 
(c) presented in the 
Budget Appendix as a past 
year actual amount, 
footnote line 1000 to 
explain the difference.
Lines 1700 and 1740, as 
well as the 
memorandum entry on 
obligations,
should reflect the 
amount shown on the 
latest SF133 if more 
recent figures are not 
available. The period 
covered by such 
amounts should be 
indicated in a footnote 
and the "Memo 
Obligations" column.
Amounts in the "Previous 
Approved" column are 
amounts from the initial 
apportionment approved 
before October 1 of the 
applicable FY.
Agency requested/OMB approved 
reapportionment of the increased 
unobligated balances (+$9,310,676) 
in the first quarter. 
If the request/approval was in the 
second quarter, increase would have 
to show on line 6002 since OMB 
can never reapportion a past period.
The CR lump sum can be 
apportioned as either Cat A 
or Cat B depending on 
agency need. Please see 
section 123.4 for more 
information.

 


 Line NoLine 
SplitLine DescriptionPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo 
ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: R & D (003-04-1109)
TAFS: 080-X-1200IterNo2Last Approved Apportionment: 9/10/CYRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1000DEUnob Bal: Brought forward, Oct 160,000,000DA[line split = DE for estimates of discretionary balances]46,000,00046,000,000[line split = DA for actual discretionary balances]
1100BA: Disc: Appropriation 24,000,00025,000,00025,000,0001134BA: Disc: Appropriations precluded from obligation-22,030,000B1001700BA: Disc: Spending auth: Collected1,5002,0002,00017401BA: Disc: Spending auth:Antic colls, reimbs, other1,000,2601,000,2601,000,26017402BA: Disc: Spending auth:Antic colls, reimbs, other348,000178,000178,000 
1920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)63,319,76072,180,26072,180,26060011st quarter22,320,44722,320,44722,320,44760022nd quarter13,009,7716,009,7716,009,77160033rd quarter13,009,7716,009,7716,009,77160044th quarter13,009,77113,009,77113,009,7716011Lump Sum1,970,00024,830,50024,830,5006190Total budgetary resources available63,319,76072,180,26072,180,260Footnote B1: Amount on line 1134 has been adjusted pursuant to OMB Bulletin XX-XX and A-11 section 120.41.
Exhibit Notes:
1)
2)
3)See section 120.60 for additional detail on what to show in the "Previous Approved" column post CR.
Consult your RMO for B1 footnote language if you received an account-specific apportionment during the short-term CR.
Apportionment Following a Continuing Resolution (CR) (No-Year TAFS)
FY 20xx ApportionmentThis exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1.
Funds provided by Public Law XXX-XXXIdentify in the header the law(s) providing the budget 
authority. Note: you can choose to reference Public Law 
number of the CR or both the CR and any appropriation 
laws.
Scenario 1 (Category B lump-sum):
If you choose to lump-sum Cat B amounts automatically 
apportioned pursuant to the OMB CR Bulletin and A-11 
section 120.41, it will all show on line 6011.
Scenario 2 (Category A lump-sum): 
If you choose to record amounts automatically apportioned 
pursuant to the OMB CR Bulletin as Cat A, you show the 
amounts from the Bulletin all in 1st quarter, line 6001. 
Scenario 3If the short -term CR is extended, the lump-sum from the 
Bulletin will be shown as follows:
Cat B: additive to line 6011Cat A: in the quarter current at the time of the enactment of 
the CR extension(s) (e.g., if extended in the second quarter, 
automatically apportioned amounts are shown in the second 
quarter, line 6002). See section 120.55Post short-term CR: adjust line 1134 in the previous approved 
column to reflect the automatically apportioned amounts from 
both the Bulletin and A-11 section 120.41 and reflect it in the 
manner described in scenario 3.
Requirement 
for line 1134 
(or line 1135 
for special or 
trust fund 
TAFS)--see 
footnote 
language 
below.
In the 
previous 
approved 
column, line 
1100 is equal 
to the rate for 
operations 
from the 
short-term 
CR, not the 
NOTE:
This exhibit reflects the cumulative amounts from the initial 
apportionment (budgetary resources not determined by the current 
action of the Congress, section 120.23) approved prior to October 1 
and the automatic apportionments provided by the OMB CR 
Bulletin and section 120.41.

 

 


Line NoLine 
SplitLine DescriptionPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo 
ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: R & D (003-04-1109)
TAFS: 080-2019-2019-1200IterNo2Last Approved Apportionment: 9/10/CYRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1100BA: Disc: Appropriation 24,000,00025,000,00025,000,0001134BA: Disc: Appropriations precluded from obligation-10,504,200B100 
1920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)13,495,80025,000,00025,000,00060011st quarter7,036,8007,036,8007,036,80060022nd quarter4,404,0004,404,0004,404,00060033rd quarter2,055,0007,806,7007,806,70060044th quarter5,752,5005,752,5006190Total budgetary resources available13,495,80025,000,00025,000,000Footnote B1: Amount on line 1134 has been adjusted pursuant to OMB Bulletin XX-XX and A-11 section 120.41.
Exhibit Notes:
1)
2)
3)See section 120.60 for additional detail on what to show in the "Previous Approved" column post CR.
Apportionment Following a Continuing Resolution (CR) (Annual TAFS, Category A)
FY 20xx ApportionmentFunds provided by Public Law XXX-XXXThis exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1.
Consult your RMO is you received an account-specific written apportionment during the short-term CR for B1 footnote language.
Identify in the header the law(s) providing the budget 
authority. Note: you can choose to reference Public Law 
number of the CR or both the CR and any appropriation 
laws.
Scenario Category A lump-sum in 1st quarter: 
If you choose to record amounts automatically apportioned 
pursuant to the OMB CR Bulletin as Cat A, you show the 
amounts from the Bulletin all in 1st quarter, line 6001. Assume 
that the CR is through January 15th and that 29.32% of the rate 
for operations is automatically apportioned.
Scenario: CR is extended in the 2nd quarterAssume the CR is extended on January 7th (2nd quarter) and 
runs through March 23rd. An additional 18.35% of the rate for 
operations is automatically apportioned in the 2nd quarter as a 
lump-sum.
Scenario: full-year bill is enacted in the 3rd quarter, 
application of A-11 section 120.41:
Post short-term CR: adjust line 1134 in the previous approved 
column to reflect the automatically apportioned amounts from 
both the OMB Bulletin and A-11 section 120.41 and reflect it in 
the manner described in scenario above. Assume the full-year 
bill is enacted on March 21st (third quarter) and put the amount 
apportioned from A-11 section 120.41 in the third quarter 
(lump-sum).
Requirement for 
line 1134 (or line 
1135 for special or 
trust funds)--see 
footnote language 
below.
In the previous 
approved column, 
line 1100 is equal 
to the rate for 
operations from 
the short-term 
CR, not the 
enacted full-year 
appropriation.
NOTE:
This exhibit reflects the automatic apportionments provided by the 
OMB CR Bulletin and section 120.41.
See note 4 below for special and/or trust fund TAFS.
Note: since 
full-year 
appropriations 
were in the 
third quarter, 
you must keep 
amounts 
apportioned in 
first and 
second quarters 
the same (see 
section 
120.55).
In Agency Request/OMB Action 
columns line 1100 reflects the full-
year enacted appropriation


Line NoLine SplitLine DescriptionPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo 
ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: R & D (003-04-1109)
TAFS: 080-X-4321IterNo2Last Approved Apportionment: 9/10/CYRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1000DEUnob Bal: Brought forward, Oct 183,584,884DA[line split = DE for estimate of discretionary balances]83,583,73883,583,738[line split = DA for actual discretionary balances]
1023Unob Bal: Applied to repay debt-20,756,800-20,756,800-20,756,8001100BA: Disc: Appropriation 4,100,0004,100,0004,100,00017001BA: Disc: Spending auth: Collected8,000,0008,000,00017002BA: Disc: Spending auth: Collected8,189,5008,189,5001740BA: Disc: Spending auth:Antic colls, reimbs, other69,806,30054,616,80054,616,8001920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)136,734,384137,733,238137,733,23860011st quarter550,000 550,000550,0001,965,42560022nd quarter650,000 650,000650,00060033rd quarter625,000 625,000625,00060044th quarter609,600 609,600609,6006011Management services23,202,00023,202,00023,202,0006,190,6256012Sales program11,834,00011,834,00011,834,0002,012,7906013Power program20,980,60020,980,60020,980,6005,125,6306182Unapportioned balance of revolving fund7828318479,282,038A179,282,038A16190Total budgetary resources available136,734,384137,733,238137,733,238Exhibit Notes:
1)
2)
3)
• Line 1023 includes estimates for the year of repayments of principal.
4)Exhibit 130E illustrates the SF 133 for this account.
For revolving funds with indefinite borrowing authority :
• Line 1740 includes any credits or payments anticipated to be received.
If you don't know the amount of the unobligated balance brought forward at the time you must submit an apportionment request for an account, 
show an estimated amount on line 1000, and submit a reapportionment form if adjustments are required, except as specified in section 120.49.
This exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1.
Public Enterprise (Revolving) or Intragovernmental (Revolving) Fund - ReapportionmentFY 20xx Apportionment 
Funds provided by Public Law XXX-XXXDisplay the text of any footnotes 
in a separate tab in your Excel 
file.
Change the line split from DE to 
DA whenever you reapportion after 
the final determination of 
unobligated balance.
Identify in the header the law(s) 
providing the budget authority. 
Note: For 
Cat A you 
fill in the 
memo 
obligations 
in the quarter 
in which the 
obligations 
were 
incurred


 Line NoLine 
SplitLine DescriptionPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency 
RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo 
ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: R & D (003-04-8109)
TAFS: 080-20xx-20xx-8004IterNo2Last Approved Apportionment: 9/10/CYRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1201BA: Mand: Appropriation (special or trust Fund)9,000,0009,000,000B19,000,000B11920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)9,000,0009,000,0009,000,0006011Management services1,500,0001,500,0001,500,000500,0006012Sales program7,500,0007,500,0007,500,0002,003,4566190Total budgetary resources available9,000,0009,000,0009,000,000Exhibit Notes:
1)
Trust Fund LimitationFY 20xx ApportionmentThis exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1.
Funds provided by Public Law N/AInclude reference to law(s) that establish 
the limitation authority in a footnote. 
Display the text of any footnotes in a 
separate tab in your Excel file.

 


 Line NoLine 
SplitLine DescriptionPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency 
RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: R & D (003-04-1109)
TAFS: 080-X-4321IterNo2Last Approved Apportionment: 9/10/CYRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1000DEUnob Bal: Brought forward, Oct 11,180,000 
DAUnob Bal: Brought forward, Oct 1410,000 410,000 
[line split = DE for estimate of discretionary balances]
[line split = DA for actual discretionary balances]
1021Unob Bal: Recov of prior year unpd obl150,000 150,000 150,000 
1700BA: Disc: Spending auth: Collected86,000 86,000 
1701BA: Disc: Spending auth: Chng uncoll pymts Fed src9,000 9,000 
1740BA: Disc: Spending auth:Antic colls, reimbs, other400,000 145,000 B1145,000 B11920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)1,730,000800,000800,00060011st quarter432,500432,500432,500250,00060022nd quarter432,500-32,500-32,50060033rd quarter432,500200,000200,00060044th quarter432,500200,000200,0006190Total budgetary resources available1,730,000800,000800,000Exhibit Notes:
1)
2)Apportionments previously established are not subject to change after the close of the period for which the apportionment is made (section 120.54).
Negative Amount Due to Reduced Unobligated BalanceFY 20xx ApportionmentThis exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1.
Funds provided by Public Law N/AWhen you need to 
reduce the 
cumulative amount 
apportioned through 
the current period, 
revise the amount 
apportioned for the 
current period to a 
negative amount.
Assuming that 1st quarter 
obligations were $250,000 in 
this example, then the 2nd 
quarter apportioned amount 
would be $150,000 (432,500 
apportioned less 250,000 
obligated plus -32,500 
apportioned).


 Current year's Apportionment:
Line NoLine 
SplitLine DescriptionPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency 
RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: R & D (003-04-1109)
TAFS: 80-20xx-20xx+1-4321IterNo1Last Approved Apportionment: N/A, First Request of yearRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1100BA: Disc: Appropriation100,000 100,000 
1920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)0100,000100,00060011st quarter12,50012,50060022nd quarter12,50012,50060033rd quarter12,50012,50060044th quarter12,50012,5006170FY 20xx+150,00050,0006190Total budgetary resources available0100,000100,000Next year's apportionment:
Line NoLine 
SplitBureau/ Account Title / Cat B Stub / Line SplitPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency 
RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: R & D (003-04-1109)
TAFS: 80-4321 20xx/20xx+1IterNo1Last Approved Apportionment: N/A, First Request of yearRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1000DAUnob Bal: Brought forward, Oct 152,000 52,000 
[line split = DE for estimate of discretionary balances]
[line split = DA for actual discretionary balances]
1061Anticipated recoveries of prior year unpaid and paid obligations5,000 5,000 
1920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)057,00057,00060011st quarter13,00013,00060022nd quarter13,00013,00060033rd quarter13,00013,00060044th quarter18,00018,0006190Total budgetary resources available057,00057,000Exhibit Notes:
1)
2)Apportionments previously established are not subject to change after the close of the period for which the apportionment is made (section 120.54).
Apportionments in Future Fiscal Years for Multi-Year Accounts (Category C)
FY 20xx ApportionmentFunds provided by Public Law N/AThis exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1.
FY 20xx+1 ApportionmentFunds provided by Public Law N/AThe planned use of 
appropriations in year 1.
Includes the full 
amount appropriatedThe planned use of 
appropriations in year 2 
assuming there's no 
programmatic need in 
first year.
The planned use of 
appropriations in year 2.
Includes the $50,000 
planned to be obligated in 
year 2 plus $2,000 not 
obligated in year 1.
Identify in the header the law(s) 
providing the budget authority. 


 Line NoLine SplitLine DescriptionPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo 
ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: R & D (003-04-8109)
TAFS: 080-X-8004IterNo2Last Approved Apportionment: 9/10/CYRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1100BA: Disc: Appropriation 90,00090,0001138BA: Disc: Approps applied to liq contract auth-90,000-90,0001600BA: Mand: Contract authority 100,000100,000100,0001622BA: Mand: Contract auth: Precluded from ob (lim)-10,000-10,0001920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)100,00090,00090,00060011st quarter25,000 25,00025,00060022nd quarter25,000 20,00020,00060033rd quarter25,000 25,00025,00060044th quarter25,000 20,000A120,0006190Total budgetary resources available100,00090,00090,000Exhibit Notes:
1)
2)
3)
This example assumes that the authorizing legislation provides $100,000 in contract authority that was apportioned in the initial apportionment for the year. Subsequently, 
the appropriation act provided $90,000 in an appropriation to liquidate contract authority and limited obligations from the contract authority to $90,000.
This exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1.
Trust Fund with Contract Authority, Appropriation to Liquidate Contract Authority, and Obligation LimitationFY 2011 ApportionmentThis example assumes that the contract authority that cannot be obligated is available to be obligated in the succeeding fiscal year. This is an obligation 
limitation.
Funds provided by Public Law N/ADisplay the text of any 
footnotes in a separate tab 
in your Excel file.
The appropriation to liquidate contract 
authority is included on line 1100 and is 
subtracted on line 1138 because it cannot 
be used to make new obligations.
Identify in the header the law(s) providing 
the budget authority. 

 


 Line NoLine SplitLine DescriptionPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo 
ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: R & D (003-04-8109)
TAFS: 080-X-8004IterNo1Last Approved Apportionment: N/A, First Request of yearRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1201BA: Mand: Appropriation (special or trust fund)30,00030,0001234BA: Mand: Appropriations precluded from obligation-70,000-70,0001250BA: Mand: Anticipated appropriation160,000160,0001920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)120,000120,0006011Payment of Benefits120,000A1120,0006190Total budgetary resources available120,000120,000Exhibit Notes:
1)
2)
3)
Trust Fund (or Special Fund) with Collections Precluded from ObligationFY 20xx ApportionmentSee exhibit 130J for a display of the treatment of this account on the SF 133 during the year and on September 30.
This exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please Appendix F1.
This example assumes that the authorizing legislation makes all receipts available until expended. However, the same law permits obligations only for 
benefits. The estimate of benefits to be paid is less than the current receipts. In this case, include all estimated current receipts on line 1250 (include 
actual collections on line 1201). Include, as a negative, the amount not needed to cover current obligations on line 1234. Do not include prior year 
collections that are not needed to incur current obligations on the apportionment or the SF 133.
Funds provided by Public Law N/ADisplay the text of any 
footnotes in a separate tab in 
your Excel file.
In this example, the amount on line 1201 equals one-
quarter of the estimated annual obligations. This amount 
is derived from prior year collections and is used to fund 
obligations and outlays until current year collections are 
received.
The amount on line 1234 equals the excess of current 
year receipts over the anticipated obligations ($40 
thousand) plus the amount on line 1201 ($30 thousand).
Identify in the header the law(s) 
providing the budget authority. 

 

 


 Line NoLine SplitLine DescriptionPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency 
RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo 
ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: R & D (003-04-1309)
TAFS: 080-X-1309IterNo1Last Approved Apportionment: N/A, First Request of yearRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1100BA: Disc: Appropriation 10,000,00010,000,0001151C1BA: Disc: Anticipated nonexpenditure transfers of Approps to 019-080X1309-1,000,000-1,000,0001151C2BA: Disc: Anticipated nonexpenditure transfers of Approps to 020-080X1309-2,000,000-2,000,0001151C1BA: Disc: Anticipated nonexpenditure transfers of Approps from 080X13091,000,0001,000,0001151C2BA: Disc: Anticipated nonexpenditure transfers of Approps from0 80X13092,000,0002,000,0001920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)10,000,00010,000,0006011Program A5,500,0005,500,0006012Program B2,000,0002,000,0006013Program C2,500,0002,500,0006190Total budgetary resources available10,000,00010,000,000Exhibit Notes:
1)
Allocation Transfer Apportionment Format, Apportioning ProgramsThis exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1.
FY 20xx ApportionmentFunds provided by Public Law N/AThe Budgetary Resources section reflects the 
accounting steps of both the parent an the 
children. The net effect is to show the 
resources available for obligation for the entire 
TAFS. 
Note: In order for the transfers to crosswalk 
correctly in the SF 133 and President's Budget, 
please ensure that both the parent and child use 
the appropriate USSGL for allocation transfers 
https://tfm.fiscal.treasury.gov/v1/supplements/ussgl.html. 

 


Line NoLine 
SplitLine DescriptionPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo 
ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: R & D (003-04-1309)
TAFS: 080-X-1309 
IterNo1Last Approved Apportionment: N/A, First Request of yearRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1000PUnob Bal: Brought forward, Oct 1 (parent, 080X1309)750,000750,0001000C1Unob Bal: Brought forward, Oct 1 (child, 019-080X1309)500,000500,0001100BA: Disc: Appropriation 10,000,00010,000,0001151C1BA: Disc: Anticipated nonexpenditure transfers of Approps to 019-080X1309-1,000,000-1,000,0001151C2BA: Disc: Anticipated nonexpenditure transfers of Approps to 012-080X1309-2,000,000-2,000,0001151PBA: Disc: Anticipated nonexpenditure transfers of Approps from 080X13091,000,0001,000,0001151PBA: Disc: Anticipated nonexpenditure transfers of Approps from 080X13092,000,0002,000,0001920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)11,250,00011,250,0006111Parent - 1st quarter3,750,0003,750,0006112State FA (019-080X1309) - 1st quarter1,000,0001,000,0006113Agric. (012-080X1309) - 1st quarter500,000500,0006124Parent - 2nd quarter4,000,0004,000,0006125State FA (019-080X1309) - 2nd quarter500,000500,0006126Agric. (012-080X1309) - 2nd quarter1,500,0001,500,0006190Total budgetary resources available11,250,00011,250,000Exhibit Notes:
1)This exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1.
Allocation Transfer Apportionment Format, Apportioning Parent and ChildFunds provided by Public Law N/AFY 20xx ApportionmentIdentify in the header the 
law(s) providing the 
budget authority.
The Budgetary Resources section reflects the 
accounting steps of both the parent an the 
children. The net effect is to show the resources 
available for obligation for the 
entre TAFS.
Note: In order for the transfers to crosswalk 
correctly in the SF 133 and President's Budget, 
please ensure that both the parent and child use 
the appropriate USSGL for allocation transfers 
https://tfm.fiscal.treasury.gov/v1/supplements/ussgl.html. 
Please note that in this scenario the parent apportions both 
the parent and the children (019-080X1309, 012-
080X1309) and separately identifies the children in the 
application of budgetary resources section.
An apportionment for a parent/child does NOT have to 
separately identify the children in the application of 
budgetary resources section of the apportionment (e.g., 
PPA could be apportioned as separate category B lines).
In the application of budgetary resources 
section of the apportionment only Cat AB 
is shown.
Same concept applies to using separate 
Cat B lines to reflect parent and child 
apportioned amounts separately.


 Line NoLine SplitLine DescriptionPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo 
ObligationsAgency: Department of State AffairsBureau: Office of the ComptrollerAccount: R & D (003-04-1309)
TAFS: 019-080-1309 /XIterNo1Last Approved Apportionment: N/A, First Request of yearRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1000Unob Bal: Brought forward, Oct 1500,000500,0001151BA: Disc: Anticipated nonexpenditure transfers of Approps from 080X130912,000,000B112,000,000B11920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)12,500,00012,500,0006011Country A activities3,000,0003,000,0006012Country B activities1,500,0001,500,0006014Country C activities3,500,0003,500,0006170Unallocated activities - available CY+14,500,000A14,500,000A16190Total budgetary resources available12,500,00012,500,000Exhibit Notes:
1)
Allocation Transfer Apportionment Format, Child OnlyFY 20xx ApportionmentFunds provided by Public Law N/AThis exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1.
B1 footnote: Allocation transfer from parent agency, Department of Government.
Identify in the header the 
law(s) providing the 
budget authority.
For a few allocation arrangements, the Parent has delegated the 
apportionment responsibility to its children. 
Note: In order for the transfers to crosswalk correctly in the SF 
133 and President's Budget, please ensure that both the parent 
and child use the appropriate USSGL for allocation transfers 
https://tfm.fiscal.treasury.gov/v1/supplements/ussgl.html.

 


 Line NoLine SplitLine DescriptionPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency 
RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo 
ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: R & D (003-04-1309)
TAFS: 080-X-1309IterNo1Last Approved Apportionment: N/A, First Request of yearRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1000Unob Bal: Brought forward, Oct 1750,000750,0001100BA: Disc: Appropriation 10,000,00010,000,0001151BA: Disc: Anticipated nonexpenditure transfers of Approps to other accounts-3,000,000-3,000,0001920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)7,750,0007,750,00060011st quarter3,750,0003,750,00060022nd quarter4,000,0004,000,0006190Total budgetary resources available7,750,0007,750,000Exhibit Notes:
1)This exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1.
Allocation Transfer Apportionment Format, Parent OnlyFY 20xx ApportionmentFunds provided by Public Law N/AIdentify in the header 
the law(s) providing the 
budget authority.
The Budgetary presentation reflects the accounting 
steps for the parent only so the net effect is to 
show the resources available for obligation for the 
parent.
Note: In order for the transfers to crosswalk 
correctly in the SF 133 and President's Budget, 
please ensure that both the parent and child use the 
appropriate USSGL for allocation transfers 
https://tfm.fiscal.treasury.gov/v1/supplements/ussgl.html. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

Line NoLine SplitLine DescriptionPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo 
ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: Research and Development (003-00-0001)
Treas Account: Research and DevelopmentTAFS: 099-X-0001IterNo2Last Approved Apportionment: 20xx-09-10RptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority providedBudgetary resources1000DEDiscretionary Estimated - Unob Bal: Brought forward, Oct 13,000,0001000DADiscretionary Actual - Unob Bal: Brought forward, Oct 13,100,0003,100,0001000MEMandatory Estimated - Unob Bal: Brought forward, Oct 12,400,0001000MAMandatory Actual - Unob Bal: Brought forward, Oct 12,500,0002,500,0001700BA: Disc: Spending auth: Collected700,000700,0001740BA: Disc: Spending auth:Antic colls, reimbs, other2,700,0002,000,0002,000,0001800BA: Mand: Spending auth: Collected500,000500,0001802SEQBA: Mand: Spending auth: Previously unavailable140,000B1140,000B1140,000B11823SEQBA: Mand: Spending auth: New\Unob bal temp reduced-210,000-210,000-210,0001840BA: Mand: Spending auth:Antic colls, reimbs, other3,000,0002,500,0002,500,0001920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)11,030,00011,230,00011,230,000Application of Budgetary Resources6011Development6,066,5006,176,5006,176,5006011Research4,963,5005,053,5005,053,5006190Total budgetary resources available11,030,00011,230,00011,230,000Exhibit Notes:
1)
Sequester ApportionmentThis exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1.
Amountssequestered in 
the previous year that 
have been determined to 
be available in the current 
year ("pop-up")
Amounts 
sequestered 
in the 
current year


 Initial Apportionment for Total Appropriation:
Line NoLine 
SplitBureau/ Account Title / Cat B Stub / Line SplitPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: R & D (003-04-1109)
TAFS: 080-20xx-20xx-4321IterNo1Last Approved Apportionment: N/A, First Request of yearRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1100BA: Disc: Appropriation100,000,000100,000,0001151BA: Disc: Anticipated non-expenditure transfers of appropriations-10,000,000-10,000,0001920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)090,000,00090,000,00060011st quarter25,000,00025,000,00060022nd quarter15,000,00015,000,00060033rd quarter25,000,00025,000,00060044th quarter25,000,00025,000,0006190Total budgetary resources available090,000,00090,000,000Initial Apportionment for Different Period of Availability:
Line NoLine 
SplitLine DescriptionPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: R & D (003-04-1109)
TAFS: 080-X-4321IterNo1Last Approved Apportionment: N/A, First Request of yearRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1151BA: Disc: Anticipated non-expenditure transfers of appropriations10,000,00010,000,0001920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)010,000,00010,000,00060022nd quarter5,000,0005,000,00060033rd quarter5,000,0005,000,0006190Total budgetary resources available010,000,00010,000,000Exhibit Notes:
1)
2)
This exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1.
See Section 3 of Appendix F for additional guidance.
Appropriations with Different Periods of Availability Executed by Non-Expenditure TransferFY 20xx ApportionmentFunds provided by Public Law N/AFY 20xx ApportionmentFunds provided by Public Law N/ALine 1100 should match the 
total appropriation, including 
the amount provided for the 
different TAFS.
If $10m is not needed in the 
extended/different TAFS, 
submit a reapportionment 
request to transfer the funds 
back to the original TAFS using 
lines 1151/1120. A 
reapportionment will also be 
needed for the original TAFS.
Identify in the header the law(s) providing the 
budget authority. 
A non-expenditure 
transfer document must 
be processed to move 
funds to the different 
TAFS specified in the 
language.
This scenario reflects how to apportion accounts where the appropriation is 
available for one year (or for a fixed amount of time) and the law permits 
"not to exceed", "up to", or "no more than" a specific amount to be available 
for a longer period of time or until expended.
Example: 
"For necessary expenses of XXX, $100 million, of which not to exceed $10 
million may be available until expended for the acquisition of XXX...."


 Apportionment of Rescinded Amounts as of September 30thLine NoLine 
SplitLine DescriptionPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency 
RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: R & D (003-04-1109)
TAFS: 080-20xx-20xx-4321IterNo1Last Approved Apportionment: N/A, First Request of yearRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1100BA: Disc: Appropriation900,000900,0001130BA: Disc: Appropriations permanently reduced-100,000-100,0001920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)0800,000800,00060011st quarter225,000225,00060022nd quarter225,000225,00060033rd quarter225,000225,00060044th quarter125,000125,0006190Total budgetary resources available0800,000800,000Apportionment of the Rescinded Amount that is Reappropriated as of September 30thLine NoLine 
SplitLine DescriptionPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency 
RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo ObligationsAgency: Department of GovernmentBureau: Office of the SecretaryAccount: R & D (003-04-1109)
TAFS: 080-20xx-20xx-4321IterNo1Last Approved Apportionment: N/A, First Request of yearRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1100BA: Disc: Appropriation100,000 100,000 
1920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)0100,000100,00060011st quarter100,000100,0006190Total budgetary resources available0100,000100,000Exhibit Notes:
1)This exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1.
Rescissions and Reappropriations of Unobligated Balances as of September 30thFY 20xx ApportionmentFunds provided by Public Law N/AFY 20xx+1 ApportionmentFunds provided by Public Law N/AAmount of 
unobligated 
balances as of 
September 30thAmount of the rescinded 
unobligated balances that 
is reappropriatedIdentify in the header the law(s) 
providing the budget authority. 
This scenario reflects how to apportion TAFS with language that rescinds 
unobligated balances as of September 30th and reappropriates them to be 
available for anadditional fiscal year. This language may also have a 
provision that if enacted after September 30th the language shall apply as if it 
were in effect on September 30th.
Example: 
"The remaining unobligated balances as of September 30 XXXX, from 
amounts made available for the Office of the Secretary, R&D account, are 
hereby permanently rescinded and an amount of additional new budget 
authority equivalent to the amount rescinded is hereby appropriated on 
September 30 XXXX to remain available until September 30 XXXX+1,......"


 Line NoLine SplitLine DescriptionPrevious 
ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo 
ObligationsAgency: Department of State AffairsBureau: Office of the ComptrollerAccount: R & D (003-04-1309)
TAFS: 019-080-X-1309IterNo1Last Approved Apportionment: N/A, First Request of yearRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1100BA: Disc: Appropriation 65,000,00065,000,00065,000,00001134BA: Disc: Appropriations precluded from obligation-43,452,500001153BA: Disc: Antic redc to apprp by offst coll/recpt-61,000,000-61,000,00001740BA: Disc: Spending auth: Antic colls, reimbs, other61,000,00061,000,00001920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)21,547,50065,000,00065,000,00060011st quarter21,547,50021,547,50021,547,50060022nd quarter10,952,50010,952,50060033rd quarter16,250,00016,250,00060044th quarter16,250,00016,250,0006190Total budgetary resources available21,547,50065,000,00065,000,000Exhibit Notes:
1)
2)For additional guidance on how to capture the latest budget execution data, see A-11 exhibit 130J.
Initial Apportionment of an Appropriation Reduced by Offsetting Collections and ReceiptsFY 20xx ApportionmentFunds provided by Public Law N/AThis exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1.
Identify in the header the 
law(s) providing the 
budget authority.
On the reapportionment after enactment of a full year appropriation, 
the amount appropriated ($65m) is reduced on line 1153 by the 
amount of estimated offsetting collections on line 1740 so as to result 
in an estimated general fund appropriation of $4m. 
Reapportionments should reflect amounts on lines 1100, 1137, 1153, 
1700, and 1740 of the latest SF 133.
Sample appropriations language:
For expenses necessary for the ..., $65,000,000, to remain available until 
expended: Provided, That the sum herein appropriated from the general 
fund shall be reduced as such offsetting collections are received during 
fiscal year 20XX, so as to result in a final fiscal year 20XX appropriation 
from the general fund estimated at $4,000,000. 
For the previously approved column, assume the account 
received an automatic apportionment during a CR that was in 
effect through December 30 and the account also received an 
automatic 30-day apportionment pursuant to section 120.41 of 
A-11 on December 30, and both current and prior year 
enacted language is the same. The pro-rata share of the up-
front appropriation is $16,204,500 (91 days / 365 days = 
24.93%, 24.93% of $65,000,000 = $16,204,500) and the 
automatic 30-day apportionment is $5,343,000 (30 days / 365 
days = 8.22%, 8.22% of $65,000,000 = $5,343,000).

 

 


 

 

 
Line NoLine SplitLine DescriptionPrevious ApprovedPrev FootnoteAgency RequestAgency FootnoteOMB ActionOMB FootnoteMemo ObligationsAgency: Department of State AffairsBureau: Office of the ComptrollerAccount: R & D (003-04-1309)
TAFS: 019-080-X-1309IterNo1Last Approved Apportionment: N/A, First Request of yearRptCatNOReporting CategoriesAdjAutNOAdjustment Authority provided1100BA: Disc: Appropriation 8,000,0008,000,0008,000,0001134BA: Disc: Appropriations precluded from obligation-5,282,400-5,282,400-5,282,4001153BA: Disc: Antic redc to apprp by offst coll/recpt001740BA: Disc: Spending auth: Antic colls, reimbs, other1,000,0001,000,0001920Total budgetary resources avail (disc. and mand.)2,717,6003,717,6003,717,60060011st quarter2,717,6002,717,6002,717,60060022nd quarter1,000,0001,000,00060033rd quarter060044th quarter06190Total budgetary resources available2,717,6003,717,6003,717,600Exhibit Notes:
1)
2)
3)The previous approved column reflects an automatic apportionment of 25% of the pro-rata share plus an estimated $2 million in excess fees collected during the CR period.
4)The full-year bill was enacted after the first quarter and language did not change.
For additional guidance on how to capture the latest budget execution data, see A-11 exhibit 130J.
Apportionment of an Appropriation Reduced by Offsetting Collections and Receipts during CR period to invoke term and condition of the CR (section 123.10)
FY 20xx ApportionmentFunds provided by Public Law N/AThis exhibit only reflects lines that contain values. For a full listing of all lines, please see Appendix F1.
Identify in the header the 
law(s) providing the 
budget authority.
Sample appropriations language:
For expenses necessary expensesto carry out....., $8,000,000, to remain available until 
expended: Provided, That the sum herein appropriated from the general fund shall be 
reduced as such offsetting collections under such section XXX are received during fiscal 
year 20XX, ....so as to result in a final fiscal year 20XX appropriation from the general 
fund estimated at not more than $0: Providedfurther, That to the extent such offsetting 
collectionss received in fiscal year XXXX exceed $8,000,000, those execess amounts 
shall remain available until expended.....
For the previously approved column, assume the account 
received an automatic apportionment during a CR lasting 
through February 1st (124 days / 365 days = 33.97%). 
Pursuant to the guidance in A-11 section 123.10, agency came 
in for an account-specific apportionment in January for an 
expected $1 million to be collected above the $8 million in 
statutue.


