CIRCULAR A-94 

 

 

GUIDELINES AND DISCOUNT RATES 

 

FOR BENEFIT-COST ANALYSIS OF FEDERAL PROGRAMS 


 CIRCULAR NO. A-94 
(Transmittal Memo No.64) 
MEMORANDUM FOR HEADS OF EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS AND ESTABLISHMENTS 
SUBJECT: Guidelines and Discount Rates for Benefit-Cost Analysis 
of Federal Programs 
Table of Contents Page 
1. Purpose .................................................... 1 
2. Rescission ................................................... 2 
3. Authority .................................................... 2 
4. Scope .................................................... 2 
5. General Principles ........................................... 3 
a. Net Present Value and Related Outcome Measures 
b. Cost-Effectiveness Analysis 
c. Elements of Benefit-Cost or Cost-Effectiveness 
Analysis 
6. Identifying and Measuring Benefits and Costs ................. 5 
a. Identifying Benefits and Costs 
b. Measuring Benefits and Costs 
7. Treatment of Inflation ....................................... 6 
a. Real or Nominal Values 
b. Recommended Inflation Assumption 
8. Discount Rate Policy ......................................... 7 
a. Real versus Nominal Discount Rates 
b. Public Investment and Regulatory Analyses 
c. Cost-Effectiveness, Lease-Purchase, Internal 
Government Investment, and Asset Sale Analyses 
9. Treatment of Uncertainty ..................................... 10 
a. Characterizing Uncertainty 
b. Expected Values 
c. Sensitivity Analysis 
d. Other Adjustments for Uncertainty 
10. Incidence and Distributional Effects ......................... 11 
a. Alternative Classifications 
b. Economic Incidence 
11. Special Guidance for Public Investment Analysis .............. 12 
a. Analysis of Excess Burdens 
b. Exceptions 
12. Special Guidance for Regulatory Impact Analysis .............. 12 
13. Special Guidance for Lease-Purchase Analysis ................. 12 
a. Coverage 
b. Required Justification for Leases 
c. Analytical Requirements and Definitions 
14. Related Guidance ............................................. 16 
15. Implementation ............................................... 16 
16. Effective Date ............................................... 16 
17. Interpretation ............................................... 16 
Appendix A: Definitions of Terms .................................. 17 
Appendix B: Additional Guidance for Discounting ................... 20 
Appendix C: Discount Rates for Cost-Effectiveness, Lease- 
Purchase, and Related Analyses .................... 22 

 

1. Purpose. The goal of this Circular is to promote efficient resource 
allocation through well-informed decision-making by the Federal Government. It 


provides general guidance for conducting benefit-cost and cost-effectiveness 
analyses. It also provides specific guidance on the discount rates to be used in 
evaluating Federal programs whose benefits and costs are distributed over time. 
The general guidance will serve as a checklist of whether an agency has 
considered and properly dealt with all the elements for sound benefit-cost and 
cost-effectiveness analyses. 
2. Rescission. This Circular replaces and rescinds Office of Management and 
Budget (OMB) Circular No. A-94, "Discount Rates to Be Used in Evaluating 
Time-Distributed Costs and Benefits," dated March 27, 1972, and Circular No. 
A-104, "Evaluating Leases of Capital Assets," dated June 1, 1986, which has been 
rescinded. Lease-purchase analysis is only appropriate after a decision has been 
made to acquire the services of an asset. Guidance for lease- purchase analysis 
is provided in Section 8.c.(2) and Section 13. 
3. Authority. This Circular is issued under the authority of 31 U.S.C. 
Section 1111 and the Budget and Accounting Act of 1921, as amended. 
4. Scope. This Circular does not supersede agency practices which are 
prescribed by or pursuant to law, Executive Order, or other relevant circulars. 
The Circular's guidelines are suggested for use in the internal planning of 
Executive Branch agencies. The guidelines must be followed in all analyses 
submitted to OMB in support of legislative and budget-programs in compliance with 
OMB Circulars No. A-11, "Preparation and Submission of Annual Budget Estimates," 
and No. A-19, "Legislative Coordination and Clearance." These guidelines must 
also be followed in providing estimates submitted to OMB in compliance with 
Executive Order No. 12291, "Federal Regulation," and the President's April 29, 
1992 memorandum requiring benefit-cost analysis for certain legislative 
proposals. 
a. Aside from the exceptions listed below, the guidelines in this Circular 
apply to any analysis used to support Government decisions to initiate, 
renew, or expand programs or projects which would result in a series of 
measurable benefits or costs extending for three or more years into the 
future. The Circular applies specifically to: 
(1) Benefit-cost or cost-effectiveness analysis of Federal programs or 
policies. 
(2) Regulatory impact analysis. 
(3) Analysis of decisions whether to lease or purchase. 
(4) Asset valuation and sale analysis. 
b. Specifically exempted from the scope of this Circular are decisions 
concerning: 
(1) Water resource projects (guidance for which is the approved Economic 
and Environmental Principles and Guidelines for Water and Related 
Land Resources Implementation Studies). 


 (2) The acquisition of commercial-type services by Government or 
contractor operation (guidance for which is OMB Circular No. A-76). 
(3) Federal energy management programs (guidance for which can be found 
in the Federal Register of January 25, 1990, and November 20, 1990). 
c. This Circular applies to all agencies of the Executive Branch of the 
Federal Government. It does not apply to the Government of the District 
of Columbia or to non-Federal recipients of loans, contracts or grants. 
Recipients are encouraged, however, to follow the guidelines provided here 
when preparing analyses in support of Federal activities. 
d. For small projects which share similar characteristics, agencies are 
encouraged to conduct generic studies and to avoid duplication of effort 
in carrying out economic analysis. 
5. General Principles. Benefit-cost analysis is recommended as 
the technique to use in a formal economic analysis of government programs or 
projects. Cost-effectiveness analysis is a less comprehensive technique, but it 
can be appropriate when the benefits from competing alternatives are the same or 
where a policy decision has been made that the benefits must be provided. 
(Appendix A provides a glossary of technical terms used in this Circular; 
technical terms are italicized when they first appear.) 
a. Net Present Value and Related Outcome Measures,. The standard criterion 
for deciding whether a government program can be justified on economic 
principles is net present value -- the discounted monetized value of 
expected net benefits (i.e., benefits minus costs). Net present value is 
computed by assigning monetary values to benefits and costs, discounting 
future benefits and costs using an appropriate discount rate, and 
subtracting the sum total of discounted costs from the sum total of 
discounted benefits. Discounting benefits and costs transforms gains and 
losses occurring in different time periods to a common unit of 
measurement. Programs with positive net present value increase social 
resources and are generally preferred. Programs with negative net present 
value should generally be avoided. (Section 8 considers discounting issues 
in more detail.) 
Although net present value is not always computable (and it does not 
usually reflect effects on income distribution), efforts to measure it can 
produce useful insights even when the monetary values of some benefits or 
costs cannot be determined. In these cases: 
(1) A comprehensive enumeration of the different types of benefits and 
costs, monetized or not, can be helpful in identifying the full 
range of program effects. 
(2) Quantifying benefits and costs is worthwhile, even when it is not 
feasible to assign monetary values; physical measurements may be 
possible and useful. 

 


Other summary effectiveness measures can provide useful supplementary 
information to net present value, and analysts are encouraged to report 
them also. Examples include the number of injuries prevented per dollar 
of cost (both measured in present value terms) or a project's internal 
rate of return. 
b. Cost-Effectiveness Analysis. A program is cost-effective if, on the basis 
of life cycle cost analysis of competing alternatives, it is determined to 
have the lowest costs expressed in present value terms for a given amount 
of benefits. Cost-effectiveness analysis is appropriate whenever it is 
unnecessary or impractical to consider the dollar value of the benefits 
provided by the alternatives under consideration. This is the case 
whenever (i) each alternative has the same annual benefits expressed in 
monetary terms; or (ii) each alternative has the same annual affects, but 
dollar values cannot be assigned to their benefits. Analysis of 
alternative defense systems often falls in this category. 
Cost-effectiveness analysis can also be used to compare programs with 
identical costs but differing benefits. In this case, the decision 
criterion is the discounted present value of benefits. The alternative 
program with the largest benefits would normally be favored. 
c. Elements of Benefit-Cost or Cost-Effectiveness Analysis. 
(1) Policy Rationale. The rationale for the Government program being 
examined should be clearly stated in the analysis. Programs may be 
justified on efficiency grounds where they address market failure, 
such as public goods and externalities. They may also be justified 
where they improve the efficiency of the Government's internal 
operations, such as cost-saving investments. 
(2) Explicit Assumptions. Analyses should be explicit about the 
underlying assumptions used to arrive at estimates of future 
benefits and costs. In the case of public health programs, for 
example, it may be necessary to make assumptions about the number of 
future beneficiaries, the intensity of service, and the rate of 
increase in medical prices. The analysis should include a statement 
of the assumptions, the rationale behind them, and a review of their 
strengths and weaknesses. Key data and results, such as 
year-by-year estimates of benefits and costs, should be reported to 
promote independent analysis and review. 
(3) Evaluation of Alternatives. Analyses should also consider 
alternative means of achieving program objectives by examining 
different program scales, different methods of provision, and 
different degrees of government involvement. For example, in 
evaluating a decision to acquire a capital asset, the analysis 
should generally consider: (i) doing nothing; (ii) direct purchase; 
(iii) upgrading, renovating, sharing, or converting existing 
government property; or (iv) leasing or contracting for services. 


(4) Verification. Retrospective studies to determine whether 
anticipated benefits and costs have been realized are potentially 
valuable. Such studies can be used to determine necessary 


corrections in existing programs, and to improve future estimates of 
benefits and costs in these programs or related ones. 
Agencies should have a plan for periodic, results-oriented 
evaluation of program effectiveness. They should also discuss the 
results of relevant evaluation studies when proposing 
reauthorizations or increased program funding. 
6. Identifying and Measuring Benefits and Costs. Analyses should include 
comprehensive estimates of the expected benefits and costs to society based on 
established definitions and practices for program and policy evaluation. Social 
net benefits, and not the benefits and costs to the Federal Government, should be 
the basis for evaluating government programs or policies that have effects on 
private citizens or other levels of government. Social benefits and costs can 
differ from private benefits and costs as measured in the marketplace because of 
imperfections arising from: (i) external economies or diseconomies where actions 
by one party impose benefits or costs on other groups that are not compensated in 
the market place; (ii) monopoly power that distorts the relationship between 
marginal costs and market prices; and (iii) taxes or subsidies. 
a. Identifying Benefits and Costs. Both intangible and tangible benefits and 
costs should be recognized. The relevant cost concept is broader than 
private-sector production and compliance costs or government cash 
expenditures. Costs should reflect the opportunity cost of any resources 
used, measured by the return to those resources in their most productive 
application elsewhere. Below are some guidelines to consider when 
identifying benefits and costs. 
(1) Incremental Benefits and Costs. Calculation of net present value 
should be based on incremental benefits and costs. Sunk costs and 
realized benefits should be ignored. Past experience is relevant 
only in helping to estimate what the value of future benefits and 
costs might be. Analyses should take particular care to identify 
the extent to which a policy such as a subsidy program promotes 
substitutes for activities of a similar nature that would occur 
without the policy. Either displaced activities should be 
explicitly recorded as costs or only incremental gains should be 
recorded as benefits of the policy. 
(2) Interactive Effects. Possible interactions between the benefits and 
costs being analyzed and other government activities should be 
considered. For example, policies affecting agricultural output 
should reflect real economic values, as opposed to subsidized 
prices. 
(3) International Effects. Analyses should focus on benefits and costs 
accruing to the citizens of the United States in determining net 
present value. Where programs or projects have effects outside the 
United States, these effects should be reported separately. 

 

(4) Transfers. There are no economic gains from a pure transfer payment 
because the benefits to those who receive such a transfer are 
matched by the costs borne by those who pay for it. Therefore, 
transfers should be excluded from the calculation of net present 


value. Transfers that arise as a result of the program or project 
being analyzed should be identified as such, however, and their 
distributional effects discussed. It should also be recognized that 
a transfer program may have benefits that are less than the 
program's real economic costs due to inefficiencies that can arise 
in the program's delivery of benefits and financing. 
b. Measuring Benefits and Costs. The principle of willingness-to-pay 
provides an aggregate measure of what individuals are willing to forego to 
obtain a given benefit. Market prices provide an invaluable starting 
point for measuring willingness-to-pay, but prices sometimes do not 
adequately reflect the true value of a good to society. Externalities, 
monopoly power, and taxes or subsidies can distort market prices. 
Taxes, for example, usually create an excess burden that represents a net 
loss to society. (The appropriate method for recognizing this excess 
burden in public investment analyses is discussed in Section 11.) In 
other cases, market prices do not exist for a relevant benefit or cost. 
When market prices are distorted or unavailable, other methods of valuing 
benefits may have to be employed. Measures derived from actual market 
behavior are preferred when they are available. 
(1) Inframarginal Benefits and Costs. Consumers would generally be 
willing to pay more than the market price rather than go entirely 
without a good they consume. The economist's concept of consumer 
surplus measures the extra value consumers derive from their 
consumption compared with the value measured at market prices. When 
it can be determined, consumer surplus provides the best measure of 
the total benefit to society from a government program or project. 
Consumer surplus can sometimes be calculated by using econometric 
methods to estimate consumer demand. 
(2) Indirect Measures of Benefits and Costs. Willingness-to-pay can 
sometimes be estimated indirectly through changes in land values, 
variations in wage rates, or other methods. Such methods are most 
reliable when they are based on actual market transactions. 
Measures should be consistent with basic economic principles and 
should be replicable. 
(3) Multiplier Effects. Generally, analyses should treat resources as 
if they were likely to be fully employed. Employment or output 
multipliers that purport to measure the secondary effects of 
government expenditures on employment and output should not be 
included in measured social benefits or costs. 
7. Treatment of Inflation. Future inflation is highly uncertain. Analysts 
should avoid having to make an assumption about the general rate of inflation 
whenever possible. 

 

a. Real or Nominal Values. Economic analyses are often most readily 
accomplished using real or constant-dollar values, i.e., by measuring 
benefits and costs in units of stable purchasing power. (Such estimates 
may reflect expected future changes in relative prices, however, where 


there is a reasonable basis for estimating such changes.) Where future 
benefits and costs are given in nominal terms, i.e., in terms of the 
future purchasing power of the dollar, the analysis should use these 
values rather than convert them to constant dollars as, for example, in 
the case of lease-purchase analysis. 
Nominal and real values must not be combined in the same analysis. 
Logical consistency requires that analysis be conducted either in constant 
dollars or in terms of nominal values. This may require converting some 
nominal values to real values, or vice versa. 
b. Recommended Inflation Assumption. When a general inflation assumption is 
needed, the rate of increase in the Gross Domestic Product deflator from 
the Administration's economic assumptions for the period of the analysis 
is recommended. For projects or programs that extend beyond the six-year 
budget horizon, the inflation assumption can be extended by using the 
inflation rate for the sixth year of the budget forecast. The 
Administration's economic forecast is updated twice annually, at the time 
the budget is published in January or February and at the time of the 
Mid-Session Review of the Budget in July. Alternative inflation 
estimates, based on credible private sector forecasts, may be used for 
sensitivity analysis. 
8. Discount Rate Policy. In order to compute net present value, it is 
necessary to discount future benefits and costs. This discounting reflects the 
time value of money. Benefits and costs are worth more if they are experienced 
sooner. All future benefits and costs, including nonmonetized benefits and 
costs, should be discounted. The higher the discount rate, the lower is the 
present value of future cash flows. For typical investments, with costs 
concentrated in early periods and benefits following in later periods, raising 
the discount rate tends to reduce the net present value. (Technical guidance on 
discounting and a table of discount factors are provided in Appendix B.) 
a. Real versus Nominal Discount Rates. The proper discount rate to use 
depends on whether the benefits and costs are measured in real or nominal 
terms. 
(1) A real discount rate that has been adjusted to eliminate the effect 
of expected inflation should be used to discount constant-dollar or 
real benefits and costs. A real discount rate can be approximated 
by subtracting expected inflation from a nominal interest rate. 
(2) A nominal discount rate that reflects expected inflation should be 
used to discount nominal benefits and costs. Market interest rates 
are nominal interest rates in this sense. 
b. Public Investment and Regulatory Analyses. The guidance in this section 
applies to benefit-cost analyses of public investments and regulatory 
programs that provide benefits and costs to the general public. Guidance 
related to cost-effectiveness analysis of internal planning decisions of 
the Federal Government is provided in Section 8.c. 

 


In general, public investments and regulations displace both private 
investment and consumption. To account for this displacement and to 
promote efficient investment and regulatory policies, the following 
guidance should be observed. 
(1) Base-Case Analysis. Constant-dollar benefit-cost analyses of 
proposed investments and regulations should report net present value 
and other outcomes determined using a real discount rate of 7 
percent. This rate approximates the marginal pretax rate of return 
on an average investment in the private sector in recent years. 
Significant changes in this rate will be reflected in future updates 
of this Circular. 
(2) Other Discount Rates. Analyses should show the sensitivity of the 
discounted net present value and other outcomes to variations in the 
discount rate. The importance of these alternative calculations 
will depend on the specific economic characteristics of the program 
under analysis. For example, in analyzing a regulatory proposal 
whose main cost is to reduce business investment, net present value 
should also be calculated using a higher discount rate than 7 
percent. 
Analyses may include among the reported outcomes the internal rate 
of return implied by the stream of benefits and costs. The internal 
rate of return is the discount rate that sets the net present value 
of the program or project to zero. While the internal rate of 
return does not generally provide an acceptable decision criterion, 
it does provide useful information, particularly when budgets are 
constrained or there is uncertainty about the appropriate discount 
rate. 
(3) Using the shadow price of capital to value benefits and costs is the 
analytically preferred means of capturing the effects of government 
projects on resource allocation in the private sector. To use this 
method accurately, the analyst must be able to compute how the 
benefits and costs of a program or project affect the allocation of 
private consumption and investment. OMB concurrence is required if 
this method is used in place of the base case discount rate. 
c. Cost-Effectiveness, Lease-Purchase, Internal Government Investment, and 
Asset Sales Analyses. The Treasury's borrowing rates should be used as 
discount rates in the following cases: 


(1) Cost-Effectiveness Analysis. Analyses that involve constant-dollar 
costs should use the real Treasury borrowing rate on marketable 
securities of comparable maturity to the period of analysis. This 
rate is computed using the Administration's economic assumptions for 
the budget, which are published in January of each year. A table of 
discount rates based on the expected interest rates for the first 
year of the budget forecast is presented in Appendix C of this 
Circular. Appendix C is updated annually and is available upon 
request from OMB. Real Treasury rates are obtained by removing 
expected inflation over the period of analysis from nominal Treasury 
interest rates. (Analyses that involve nominal costs should use 


nominal Treasury rates for discounting, as described in the 
following paragraph.) 
(2) Lease-Purchase Analysis. Analyses of nominal lease payments should 
use the nominal Treasury borrowing rate on marketable securities of 
comparable maturity to the period of analysis. Nominal Treasury 
borrowing rates should be taken from the economic assumptions for 
the budget. A table of discount rates based on these assumptions is 
presented in Appendix C of this Circular, which is updated annually. 
(Constant dollar lease-purchase analyses should use the real 
Treasury borrowing rate, described in the preceding paragraph.) 
(3) Internal Government Investments. Some Federal investments provide 
"internal" benefits which take the form of increased Federal 
revenues or decreased Federal costs. An example would be an 
investment in an energy-efficient building system that reduces 
Federal operating costs. Unlike the case of a Federally funded 
highway (which provides "external" benefits to society as a whole), 
it is appropriate to calculate such a project's net present value 
using a comparable-maturity Treasury rate as a discount rate. The 
rate used may be either nominal or real, depending on how benefits 
and costs are measured. 
Some Federal activities provide a mix of both Federal cost savings 
and external social benefits. For example, Federal investments in 
information technology can produce Federal savings in the form of 
lower administrative costs and external social benefits in the form 
of faster claims processing. The net present value of such 
investments should be evaluated with the 7 percent real discount 
rate discussed in Section 8.b. unless the analysis is able to 
allocate the investment's costs between provision of Federal cost 
savings and external social benefits. Where such an allocation is 
possible, Federal cost savings and their associated investment costs 
may be discounted at the Treasury rate, while the external social 
benefits and their associated investment costs should be discounted 
at the 7 percent real rate. 
(4) Asset Sale Analysis. Analysis of possible asset sales should 
reflect the following: 
(a) The net present value to the Federal Government of holding an 
asset is best measured by discounting its future earnings 
stream using a Treasury rate. The rate used may be either 
nominal or real, depending on how earnings are measured. 


(b) Analyses of government asset values should explicitly deduct 
the cost of expected defaults or delays in payment from 
projected cash flows, along with government administrative 
costs. Such analyses should also consider explicitly the 
probabilities of events that would cause the asset to become 
nonfunctional, impaired or obsolete, as well as probabilities 
of events that would increase asset value. 

(c) Analyses of possible asset sales should assess the gain in 
social efficiency that can result when a government asset is 
subject to market discipline and private incentives. Even 


though a government asset may be used more efficiently in the 
private sector, potential private-sector purchasers will 
generally discount such an asset's earnings at a rate in 
excess of the Treasury rate, in part, due to the cost of 
bearing risk. When there is evidence that government assets 
can be used more efficiently in the private sector, valuation 
analyses for these assets should include sensitivity 
comparisons that discount the returns from such assets with 
the rate of interest earned by assets of similar riskiness in 
the private sector. 
9. Treatment of Uncertainty. Estimates of benefits and costs are typically 
uncertain because of imprecision in both underlying data and modeling 
assumptions. Because such uncertainty is basic to many analyses, its effects 
should be analyzed and reported. Useful information in such a report would 
include the key sources of uncertainty; expected value estimates of outcomes; the 
sensitivity of results to important sources of uncertainty; and where possible, 
the probability distributions of benefits, costs, and net benefits. 
a. Characterizing Uncertainty. Analyses should attempt to characterize the 
sources and nature of uncertainty. Ideally, probability distributions of 
potential benefits, costs, and net benefits should be presented. It 
should be recognized that many phenomena that are treated as deterministic 
or certain are, in fact, uncertain. In analyzing uncertain data, 
objective estimates of probabilities should be used whenever possible. 
Market data, such as private insurance payments or interest rate 
differentials, may be useful in identifying and estimating relevant risks. 
Stochastic simulation methods can be useful for analyzing such phenomena 
and developing insights into the relevant probability distributions. In 
any case, the basis for the probability distribution assumptions should be 
reported. Any limitations of the analysis because of uncertainty or 
biases surrounding data or assumptions should be discussed. 
b. Expected Values. The expected values of the distributions of benefits, 
costs and net benefits can be obtained by weighting each outcome by its 
probability of occurrence, and then summing across all potential outcomes. 
If estimated benefits, costs and net benefits are characterized by point 
estimates rather than as probability distributions, the expected value (an 
unbiased estimate) is the appropriate estimate for use. 
Estimates that differ from expected values (such as worst-case estimates) 
may be provided in addition to expected values, but the rationale for such 
estimates must be clearly presented. For any such estimate, the analysis 
should identify the nature and magnitude of any bias. For example, 
studies of past activities have documented tendencies for cost growth 
beyond initial expectations; analyses should consider whether past 
experience suggests that initial estimates of benefits or costs are 
optimistic. 

 

c. Sensitivity Analysis. Major assumptions should be varied and net present 
value and other outcomes recomputed to determine how sensitive outcomes 
are to changes in the assumptions. The assumptions that deserve the most 
attention will depend on the dominant benefit and cost elements and the 


areas of greatest uncertainty of the program being analyzed. For example, 
in analyzing a retirement program, one would consider changes in the 
number of beneficiaries, future wage growth, inflation, and the discount 
rate. In general, sensitivity analysis should be considered for estimates 
of: (i) benefits and costs; (ii) the discount rate; (iii) the general 
inflation rate; and (iv) distributional assumptions. Models used in the 
analysis should be well documented and, where possible, available to 
facilitate independent review. 
d. Other Adjustments for Uncertainty. The absolute variability of a risky 
outcome can be much less significant than its correlation with other 
significant determinants of social welfare, such as real national income. 
In general, variations in the discount rate are not the appropriate 
method of adjusting net present value for the special risks of particular 
projects. In some cases, it may be possible to estimate 
certainty-equivalents which involve adjusting uncertain expected values to 
account for risk. 
10. Incidence and Distributional Effects. The principle of maximizing net 
present value of benefits is based on the premise that gainers could fully 
compensate the losers and still be better off. The presence or absence of such 
compensation should be indicated in the analysis. When benefits and costs have 
significant distributional effects, these effects should be analyzed and 
discussed, along with the analysis of net present value. (This will not usually 
be the case for cost-effectiveness analysis where the scope of government 
activity is not changing.) 
a. Alternative Classification. Distributional effects may be analyzed by 
grouping individuals or households according to income class (e.g., income 
quintiles), geographical region, or demographic group (e.g., age). Other 
classifications, such as by industry or occupation, may be appropriate in 
some circumstances. 
Analysis should aim at identifying the relevant gainers and losers from 
policy decisions. Effects on the preexisting assignment of property 
rights by the program under analysis should be reported. Where a policy 
is intended to benefit a specified subgroup of the population, such as the 
poor, the analysis should consider how effective the policy is in reaching 
its targeted group. 
b. Economic Incidence. Individuals or households are the ultimate recipients 
of income; business enterprises are merely intermediaries. Analyses of 
distribution should identify economic incidence, or how costs and benefits 
are ultimately borne by households or individuals. 


Determining economic incidence can be difficult because benefits and costs 
are often redistributed in unintended and unexpected ways. For example, a 
subsidy for the production of a commodity will usually raise the incomes 
of the commodity's suppliers, but it can also benefit consumers of the 
commodity through lower prices and reduce the incomes for suppliers of 
competing products. A subsidy also raises the value of specialized 
resources used in the production of the subsidized commodity. As the 


subsidy is incorporated in asset values, its distributional effects can 
change. 

 
11. Special Guidance for Public Investment. This guidance applies only to 
public investments with social benefits apart from decreased Federal costs. It 
is not required for cost-effectiveness or lease-purchase analyses. Because taxes 
generally distort relative prices, they impose a burden in excess of the revenues 
they raise. Recent studies of the U.S. tax system suggest a range of values for 
the marginal excess burden, of which a reasonable estimate is 25 cents per dollar 
of revenue. 
a. Analysis of Excess Burdens. The presentation of results for public 
investments that are not justified on cost-saving grounds should include a 
supplementary analysis with a 25 percent excess burden. Thus, in such 
analyses, costs in the form of public expenditures should be multiplied by 
a factor of 1.25 and net present value recomputed. 
b. Exceptions. Where specific information clearly suggests that the excess 
burden is lower (or higher) than 25 percent, analyses may use a different 
figure. When a different figure is used, an explanation should be 
provided for it. An example of such an exception is an investment funded 
by user charges that function like market prices; in this case, the excess 
burden would be zero. Another example would be a project that provides 
both cost savings to the Federal Government and external social benefits. 
If it is possible to make a quantitative determination of the portion of 
this project's costs that give rise to Federal savings, that portion of 
the costs may be exempted from multiplication by the factor of 1.25. 
12. Special Guidance for Regulatory Impact Analysis. Additional guidance for 
analysis of regulatory policies is provided in Regulatory Program of the United 
States Government which is published annually by OMB. (See "Regulatory Impact 
Analysis Guidance," Appendix V of Regulatory Program of the United States 
Government for April 1, 1991 to March 31, 1992.) 
13. Special Guidance for Lease-Purchase Analysis. The special guidance in 
this section does not apply to the decision to acquire the use of an asset. In 
deciding that, the agency should conduct a benefit-cost analysis, if possible. 
Only after the decision to acquire the services of an asset has been made is 
there a need to analyze the decision whether to lease or purchase. 
a. Coverage. The Circular applies only when both of the following tests of 
applicability are satisfied: 
(1) The lease-purchase analysis concerns a capital asset, 
(including durable goods, equipment, buildings, facilities, 
installations, or land) which: 
(a) Is leased to the Federal Government for a term of three or 
more years; or, 



(b) Is new, with an economic life of less than three years, and 
leased to the Federal Government for a term of 75 percent or 
more of the economic life of the asset; or, 

 
(c) Is built for the express purpose of being leased to the 
Federal Government; or, 
(d) Is leased to the Federal Government and clearly has no 
alternative commercial use (e.g., a special- purpose 
government installation). 
(2) The lease-purchase analysis concerns a capital asset or a group of 
related assets whose total fair market value exceeds $1 million. 
b. Required Justification for Leases. All leases of capital assets must be 
justified as preferable to direct government purchase and ownership. This 
can be done in one of three ways: 
(1) By conducting a separate lease-purchase analysis. This is the only 
acceptable method for major acquisitions. A lease represents a 
major acquisition if: 
(a) The acquisition represents a separate line-item in the 
agency's budget; 
(b) The agency or OMB determines the acquisition is a major one; 
or 
(c) The total purchase price of the asset or group of assets to be 
leased would exceed $500 million. 
(2) By conducting periodic lease-purchase analyses of recurrent 
decisions to lease similar assets used for the same general purpose. 
Such analyses would apply to the entire class of assets. OMB 
approval should be sought in determining the scope of any such 
generic analysis. 
(3) By adopting a formal policy for smaller leases and submitting that 
policy to the OMB for approval. Following such a policy should 
generally result in the same lease- purchase decisions as would 
conducting separate lease- purchase analyses. Before adopting the 
policy, it should be demonstrated that: 
(a) The leases in question would generally result in substantial 
savings to the Government that could not be realized on a 
purchase; 
(b) The leases are so small or so short-term as to make separate 
lease-purchase analysis impractical; and 
(c) Leases of different types are scored consistently with the 
instructions in Appendices B and C of OMB Circular No. A-11. 



c. Analytical Requirements and Definitions. Whenever a Federal agency needs 
to acquire the use of a capital asset, it should do so in the way that is 
least expensive for the Government as a whole. 

 
(1) Life-Cycle Cost. Lease-purchase analyses should compare the net 
discounted present value of the life-cycle cost of leasing with the 
full costs of buying or constructing an identical asset. The full 
costs of buying include the asset's purchase price plus the net 
discounted present value of any relevant ancillary services 
connected with the purchase. (Guidance on the discount rate to use 
for lease-purchase analysis is in Section 8.c.) 
(2) Economic Life. For purposes of lease-purchase analysis, the 
economic life of an asset is its remaining or productive lifetime. 
It begins when the asset is acquired and ends when the asset is 
retired from service. The economic life is frequently not the same 
as the useful life for tax purposes. 
(3) Purchase Price. The purchase price of the asset for purposes of 
lease-purchase analysis is its fair market value, defined as the 
price a willing buyer could reasonably expect to pay a willing 
seller in a competitive market to acquire the asset. 
(a) In the case of property that is already owned by the Federal 
Government or that has been donated or acquired by 
condemnation, an imputed purchase price should be estimated. 
(Guidance on making imputations is provided in Section 
13.c.(6).) 
(b) If public land is used for the site of the asset, the imputed 
market value of the land should be added to the purchase 
price. 
(c) The asset's estimated residual value, as of the end of the 
period of analysis, should be subtracted from its purchase 
price. (Guidance on estimating residual value is provided in 
Section 13.c.(7).) 
(4) Taxes. In analyzing the cost of a lease, the normal payment of 
taxes on the lessor's income from the lease should not be subtracted 
from the lease costs since the normal payment of taxes will also be 
reflected in the purchase cost. The cost to the Treasury of special 
tax benefits, if any, associated with the lease should be added to 
the cost of the lease. Examples of such tax benefits might include 
highly accelerated depreciation allowances or tax-free financing. 
(5) Ancillary Services. If the terms of the lease include ancillary 
services provided by the lessor, the present value of the cost of 
obtaining these services separately should be added to the purchase 
price. Such costs may be excluded if they are estimated to be the 
same for both lease and purchase alternatives or too small to affect 
the comparison. Examples of ancillary services include: 



(a) All costs associated with acquiring the property and preparing 
it for use, including construction, installation, site, 
design, and management costs. 


(b) Repair and improvement costs (if included in lease payments). 
(c) Operation and maintenance costs (if included in lease 
payments). 
(d) Imputed property taxes (excluding foreign property taxes on 
overseas acquisitions except where actually paid). The 
imputed taxes approximate the costs of providing municipal 
services such as water, sewage, and police and fire 
protection. (See Section (6) below.) 
(e) Imputed insurance premiums. (See Section (6) below.) 
(6) Estimating Imputed Costs. Certain costs associated with the Federal 
purchase of an asset may not involve a direct monetary payment. 
Some of these imputed costs may be estimated as follows. 
(a) Purchase Price. An imputed purchase price for an asset that 
is already owned by the Federal Government or which has been 
acquired by donation or condemnation should be based on the 
fair market value of similar properties that have been traded 
on commercial markets in the same or similar localities. The 
same method should be followed in estimating the imputed value 
of any Federal land used as a site for the asset. 
(b) Property Taxes. Imputed property taxes may be estimated in 
two ways. 
(i) Determine the property tax rate and assessed (taxable) 
value for comparable property in the intended locality. 
If there is no basis on which to estimate future 
changes in tax rates or assessed values, the first-year 
tax rate and assessed value (inflation adjusted for each 
subsequent year) can be applied to all years. Multiply 
the assessed value by the tax rate to determine the 
annual imputation for property taxes. 
(ii) As an alternative to step (i) above, obtain an estimate 
of the current local effective property tax rate from 
the Building Owners and Managers Association's Regional 
Exchange Reports. Multiply the fair market value of the 
government-owned property (inflation adjusted for each 
year) by the effective tax rate. 
(c) Insurance Premiums. Determine local estimates of standard 
commercial coverage for similar property from the Building 
Owners and Managers Association's Regional Exchange Reports. 


(7) Residual Value. A property's residual value is an estimate of the 
price that the property could be sold for at the end of the period 


of the lease-purchase analysis, measured in discounted present value 
terms. 


(a) The recommended way to estimate residual value is to determine 
what similar, comparably aged property is currently selling 
for in commercial markets. 
(b) Alternatively, book estimates of the resale value of used 
property may be available from industry or government sources. 
(c) Assessed values of similar, comparably aged properties 
determined for property tax purposes may also be used. 
(8) Renewal Options. In determining the term of a lease, all renewal 
options shall be added to the initial lease period. 
14. Related Guidance. 
a. OMB Circular No. A-11, "Preparation and Submission of Annual Budget 
Estimates." 
b. OMB Circular No. A-19, "Legislative Coordination and Clearance." 
c. OMB Circular No. A-70, "Federal Credit Policy." 
d. OMB Circular No. A-76, "Performance of Commercial Activities." 
e. OMB Circular No. A-109, "Policies to Be Followed in the Acquisition of 
Major Systems." 
f. OMB Circular No. A-130, "Management of Federal Information Resources." 
9. "Joint OMB and Treasury Guidelines to the Department of Defense Covering 
Lease or Charter Arrangements for Aircraft and Naval Vessels." 
h. Executive Order 12291, "Federal Regulation." 
i. "Regulatory Impact Analysis Guidance," in Regulatory Program of the United 
States Government. 
j. "Federal Energy Management and Planning Programs; Life Cycle Cost 
Methodology and Procedures," Federal Register, Vol. 55, No. 17, January 
25, 1990, and Vol. 55, No. 224, November 20, 1990. 
k. Presidential Memorandum of April 29, 1992, "Benefits and Costs of 
Legislative Proposals." 
15. Implementation. Economic analyses submitted to OMB will be 
reviewed for conformity with Items 5 to 13 in this Circular, through the Circular 
No. A-11 budget justification and submission process, and Circular No. A-19, 
legislative review process. 
16. Effective Date. This Circular is effective immediately. 


17. Interpretation. Questions concerning interpretation of this Circular 
should be addressed to the Office of Economic Policy, Office of Management and 
Budget (202-395-5873) or, in the case of regulatory issues and analysis, to the 
Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (202-395-4852). 


 APPENDIX A 
DEFINITION OF TERMS 
Benefit-Cost Analysis -- A systematic quantitative method of assessing the 
desirability of government projects or policies when it is important to take a 
long view of future effects and a broad view of possible side-effects. 
Capital Asset -- Tangible property, including durable goods, equipment, 
buildings, installations, and land. 
Certainty-Equivalent -- A certain (i.e., nonrandom) outcome that an individual 
values equally to an uncertain outcome. For a riskaverse individual, the 
certainty-equivalent for an uncertain set of benefits may be less than the 
mathematical expectation of the outcome; for example, an individual may value a 
50-50 chance of winning $100 or $0 as only $45. Analogously, a risk-averse 
individual may have a certainty-equivalent for an uncertain set of costs that is 
larger in magnitude than the mathematical expectation of costs. 
Cost-Effectiveness -- A systematic quantitative method for comparing the costs of 
alternative means of achieving the same stream of benefits or a given objective. 
Consumer Surplus -- The maximum sum of money a consumer would be willing to pay 
to consume a given amount of a good, less the amount actually paid. It is 
represented graphically by the area between the demand curve and the price line 
in a diagram representing the consumer's demand for the good as a function of its 
price. 
Discount Rate -- The interest rate used in calculating the present value of 
expected yearly benefits and costs. 
Discount Factor -- The factor that translates expected benefits or costs in any 
given future year into present value terms. The discount factor is equal to 1/(1 
+ i)t where i is the interest rate and t is the number of years from the date of 
initiation for the program or policy until the given future year. 
Excess Burden -- Unless a tax is imposed in the form of a lump sum unrelated to 
economic activity, such as a head tax, it will affect economic decisions on the 
margin. Departures from economic efficiency resulting from the distorting effect 
of taxes are called excess burdens because they disadvantage society without 
adding to Treasury receipts. This concept is also sometimes referred to as 
deadweight loss. 
External Economy or Diseconomy -- A direct effect, either positive or negative, 
on someone's profit or welfare arising as a byproduct of some other person's or 
firm's activity. Also referred to as neighborhood or spillover effects, or 
externalities for short. 
Incidence -- The ultimate distributional effect of a tax, expenditure, or 
regulatory program. 

 

Inflation -- The proportionate rate of change in the general price level, as 
opposed to the proportionate increase in a specific price. Inflation is usually 


measured by a broad-based price index, such as the implicit deflator for Gross 
Domestic Product or the Consumer Price Index. 
Internal Rate of Return -- The discount rate that sets the net present value of 
the stream of net benefits equal to zero. The internal rate of return may have 
multiple values when the stream of net benefits alternates from negative to 
positive more than once. 
Life Cycle Cost -- The overall estimated cost for a particular program 
alternative over the time period corresponding to the life of the program, 
including direct and indirect initial costs plus any periodic or continuing costs 
of operation and maintenance. 
Multiplier -- The ratio between the direct effect on output or employment and the 
full effect, including the effects of second order rounds or spending. 
Multiplier effects greater than 1.0 require the existence of involuntary 
unemployment. 
Net Present Value -- The difference between the discounted present value of 
benefits and the discounted present value of costs. 
Nominal Values -- Economic units measured in terms of purchasing power of the 
date in question. A nominal value reflects the effects of general price 
inflation. 
Nominal Interest Rate -- An interest rate that is not adjusted to remove the 
effects of actual or expected inflation. Market interest rates are generally 
nominal interest rates. 
Opportunity Cost -- The maximum worth of a good or input among possible 
alternative uses. 
Real or Constant Dollar Values -- Economic units measured in terms of constant 
purchasing power. A real value is not affected by general price inflation. Real 
values can be estimated by deflating nominal values with a general price index, 
such as the implicit deflator for Gross Domestic Product or the Consumer Price 
Index. 
Real Interest Rate -- An interest rate that has been adjusted to remove the 
effect of expected or actual inflation. Real interest rates can be approximated 
by subtracting the expected or actual inflation rate from a nominal interest 
rate. (A precise estimate can be obtained by dividing one plus the nominal 
interest rate by one plus the expected or actual inflation rate, and subtracting 
one from the resulting quotient.) 
Relative Price -- A price ratio between two goods as, for example, the ratio of 
the price of energy to the price of equipment. 


Shadow Price -- An estimate of what the price of a good or input would be in the 
absence of market distortions, such as externalities or taxes. For example, the 
shadow price of capital is the present value of the social returns to capital 
(before corporate income taxes) measured in units of consumption. 


Sunk Cost -- A cost incurred in the past that will not be affected by any present 
or future decision. Sunk costs should be ignored in determining whether a new 
investment is worthwhile. 
Transfer Payment -- A payment of money or goods. A pure transfer is unrelated to 
the provision of any goods or services in exchange. Such payments alter the 
distribution of income, but do not directly affect the allocation of resources on 
the margin. 
Treasury Rates -- Rates of interest on marketable Treasury debt. Such debt is 
issued in maturities ranging from 91 days to 30 years. 


Willingness to Pay -- The maximum amount an individual would be willing to give 
up in order to secure a change in the provision of a good or service. 


 APPENDIX B 
ADDITIONAL GUIDANCE FOR DISCOUNTING 
1. Sample Format for Discounting Deferred Costs and Benefits 
Assume a 10-year program which will commit the Government to the stream of real 
(or constant-dollar) expenditures appearing in column (2) of the table below and 
which will result in a series of real benefits appearing in column (3). The 
discount factor for a 7 percent discount rate is shown in column (4). The 
present value cost for each of the 10 years is calculated by multiplying column 
(2) by column (4); the present value benefit for each of the 10 years is 
calculated by multiplying column (3) by column (4). The present values of costs 
and benefits are presented in columns (5) and (6) respectively. 

 
Year since 
initiation, 
renewal or 
expansion 
(1) 

 
Expected 
yearly 
cost 
(2) 

 
Expected 
yearly 
benefit 
(3) 

 
Discount 
factors 
for 7% 
(4) 

 
Present 
value of 
costs 
Col. 2 x 
Col. 4 
(5) 

 
Present 
value of 
benefits 
Col. 3 x 
Col. 4 
(6) 

 


 


 


 


 


 


 
1 

 
$10.00 

 
$ 0.00 

 
0.9346 

 
$ 9.35 

 
$ 0.00 

 
2 

 
20.00 

 
0.00 

 
0.8734 

 
17.47 

 
0.00 

 
3 

 
30.00 

 
5.00 

 
0.8163 

 
24.49 

 
4.08 

 
4 

 
30.00 

 
10.00 

 
0.7629 

 
22.89 

 
7.63 

 
5 

 
20.00 

 
30.00 

 
0.7130 

 
14.26 

 
21.39 

 
6 

 
10.00 

 
40.00 

 
0.6663 

 
6.66 

 
26.65 

 
7 

 
5.00 

 
40.00 

 
0.6227 

 
3.11 

 
24.91 

 
8 

 
5.00 

 
40.00 

 
0.5820 

 
2.91 

 
23.28 

 
9 

 
5.00 

 
40.00 

 
0.5439 

 
2.72 

 
21.76 

 
10 

 
5.00 

 
25.00 

 
0.5083 

 
2.54 

 
12.71 

 
Total 

 


 


 


 
$106.40 

 
$142.41 



 
NOTE: The discount factor is calculated as 1/(1 + i)t where i is the interest 
rate (.07) and t is the year. 
The sum of column (5) is the total present value of costs and the sum of column 
(6) is the total present value of benefits. Net present value is $36.01, the 
difference between the sum of discounted benefits and the sum of discounted 
costs. 
2. End-of-Year and Mid-Year Discount Factors 

 

The discount factors presented in the table above are calculated on the implicit 
assumption that costs and benefits occur as lump sums at year-end. When costs 
and benefits occur in a steady stream, applying mid-year discount factors is more 


appropriate. For instance, the first cost in the table may be estimated to occur 
after six months, rather than at the end of one year to approximate better a 
steady stream of costs and benefits occurring over the first year. Similarly, it 
may be assumed that all other costs and benefits are advanced six months to 
approximate better a continuing steady flow. 
The present values of costs and benefits computed from the table above can be 
converted to a mid-year discounting basis by multiplying them by 1.0344 (the 
square root of 1.07). Thus, if the above example were converted to a mid-year 
basis, the present value of costs would be $110.06, the present value of benefits 
would be $147.31, and the net present value would be $37.25. 
3. Illustrative Discount Factors for Discount Rate 
of 7 percent 
Year since Beginning- 
Initiation, Year-end Mid-year of-year 
Renewal or Discount Discount Discount 
Expansion Factors Factors Factors 
1 0.9346 0.9667 1.0000 
2 0.8734 0.9035 0.9346 
3 0.8163 0.8444 0.8734 
4 0.7629 0.7891 0.8163 
5 0.7130 0.7375 0.7629 
6 0.6663 0.6893 0.7130 
7 0.6227 0.6442 0.6663 
8 0.5820 0.6020 0.6227 
9 0.5439 0.5626 0.5820 
10 0.5083 0.5258 0.5439 
11 0.4751 0.4914 0.5083 
12 0.4440 0.4593 0.4751 
13 0.4150 0.4292 0.4440 
14 0.3878 0.4012 0.4150 
15 0.3624 0.3749 0.3878 
16 0.3387 0.3504 0.3624 
17 0.3166 0.3275 0.3387 
18 0.2959 0.3060 0.3166 
19 0.2765 0.2860 0.2959 
20 0.2584 0.2673 0.2765 
21 0.2415 0.2498 0.2584 
22 0.2257 0.2335 0.2415 
23 0.2109 0.2182 0.2257 
24 0.1971 0.2039 0.2109 
25 0.1842 0.1906 0.1971 
26 0.1722 0.1781 0.1842 
27 0.1609 0.1665 0.1722 
28 0.1504 0.1556 0.1609 
29 0.1406 0.1454 0.1504 

 30 0.1314 0.1359 0.1406 


