(Document certified by Government Publishing Office <pkisupport@gpo.gov>) Signed by Government Publishing Office <pkisupport@gpo.gov> Time: 2022.12.07 10:47:46 -05'00' Reason: Government Publishing Office attests that this document has not been altered since it was disseminated by Government Publishing Office Location: Government Publishing Office, Washington, DC 20401

31 use 1301. 

 PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT. 

TITLE V—CHANGE OF FISCAL YEAR 

Sec. 501. Fiscal year l;o begin October 1. 
Sec. 502. Transition to new fiscal year. 
Sec. 503. Accounting procedures. 
Sec. 504. Conversion of authorizations of appropriations. 
Sec. 505. Repeals. 
Sec, 506. Technical amendment. 

TITLE VI—AMENDMENTS TO BUDGET AND ACCOUNTING ACT, 1921 

Sec. 601. Matters to be included in President's budget. 
Sec. 602. Midyear review. 
Sec. 603. Five-year budget projections. 
Sec. 604. Allowances for supplemental budget authority and uncontrollable out


lays. 
Sec. 605. Budget data based on continuation of existing level of services. 
Sec. 606. Study of off-budget agencies. 
Sec. 607. Year-ahead requests for authorization of new budget authority. 

TITLE VII—PROGRAM REVIEW AND EVALUATION 

Sec. 701. Review and evaluation by standing committees. 
Sec. 702. Review and evaluation by the Comptroller General. 
Sec. 703. Continuing study of additional budget reform proposals. 

TITLE VIII—FISCAL AND BUDGETARY INFORMATION AND CONTROLS 

Sec. 801. Amendment to Legislative Reorganization Act of 1970. 
Sec. 802. Changes in functional categories. 

TITLE IX—MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS; EFFECTIVE DATES 

Sec. 901. Amendments to rules of the House. 
Sec. 902. Conforming amendments to standing rules of the Senate. 
Sec. 903. Amendments to Legislative Reorganization Act of 1946. 
Sec. 904. Exercise of rulemaking powers. 
Sec. 905. Effective dates. 
Sec. 906. Application of congressional budget process to fiscal year 1976. 

TITLE X—IMPOUNDMENT CONTROL 

PART A—GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 1001. Disclaimer. 
Sec. 1002. Amendment to Antideficiency Act. 
Sec. 1003. Repeal of existing impoundment reporting provision. 

PART B—CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED RESCISSIONS, 
RESERVATIONS, AND DEFFERALS OF BUDGET AUTHORITY 

Sec. 1011. Definitions. 
Sec. 1012. Rescission of budget authority. 
Sec. 1013. Disapproval of proposed deferrals of budget authority. 
Sec. 1014. Transmission of messages; publication. 

Sec. 1015. Reports by Comptroller General. 
Sec. 1016. Suits by Comptroller General. 

Sec. 1017. Procedure in House and Senate. 

DECLARATION OF PURPOSES 

^yQ^ 2. The Congress declares that it is essential— 

(1) to assure effective congressional control over the budgetary 
process; 
(2) to provide for the congressional determination each year 
of the appropriate level of Federal revenues and expenditures; 
(3) to provide a system of impoundment control; 
(4) to establish national budget priorities; and 
(5) to provide for the furnishing of information by the executive 
branch in a manner that will assist the Congress in discharging 
its duties. 

88 STAT.] PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 

DEFINITIONS 

SEC. 3. (a) I N GENERAL.—For purposes of this Act— 

(1) The terms "budget outlays" and "outlays" mean, with 
respect to any fiscal year, expenditures and net lending of funds 
under budget authority during such year. 
(2) The term "budget authority" means authority provided by 
law to enter into obligations which will result in immediate or 
future outlays involving Government funds, except that such term 
does not include authority to insure or guarantee the repayment 
of indebtedness incurred by another person or government. 
(3) The term "tax expenditures" means those revenue losses 
attributable to provisions of the Federal tax laws which allow a 
special exclusion, exemption, or deduction from gross income or 
which provide a special credit, a preferential rate of tax, or a 
deferral of tax liability; and the term "tax expenditures budget" 
means an enumeration of such tax expenditures. 
(4) The term "concurrent resolution on the budget" means— 
(A) a concurrent resolution setting forth the congressional 
budget for the United States Government for a fiscal year as 
provided in section 301; 
(B) a concurrent resolution reaiTirming or revising the congressional 
budget for the United States Government for a 
fiscal year as provided in section 310; and 
(C) any other concurrent resolution revising the congressional 
budget for the United States Government for a fiscal 
year as described in section 304. 
(5) The term "appropriation Act" means an Act referred to in 
section 105 of title 1, United States Code. 
(b) JOINT COMMITTEE ON ATOMIC ENERGY.—For purposes of titles 
II, III, and IV of this Act, the Members of the House of Representatives 
who are members of the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy 
shall be treated as a standing committee of the House, and the Members 
of the Senate who are members of the Joint Committee shall be 
treated as a standing committee of the Senate. 
TITLE I—ESTABLISHMENT OF HOUSE AND SENATE 
BUDGET COMMITTEES 

BUDGET COMMITTEE or THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 

SEC. 101. (a) Clause 1 of Rule X of the Rules of the House of 
Representatives is amended by redesignating paragraphs (e) through 

(u) as paragraphs (f) through (v), respectively, and by inserting 
after paragraph (d) the following new paragraph: 
"(e) Committee on the Budget, to consist of twenty-three Members 
as follows: 
"(1) five Members who are members of the Committee on 
Appropriations; 
" (2) five Members who are members of the Committee on Ways 
and Means; 
"(3) eleven Members who are members of other standing 
committees; 
"(4) one Member from the leadership of the majority party; 

and 

 3i use 1302. 

 ^°«^ p- 322. 

BudTeTAcTor' 
'^^^• 

 Membership. 


Term. 

Seniority rul 
exception. 

Committee 
sessions. 

Subpenas. 

Duties. 

PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT 

"(5) one Member from the leadership of the minority party. 
No Member shall serve as a member of the Committee on the Budget 
during more than two Congresses in any period of five successive 
Congresses beginning after 1974 (disregarding for this purpose any 
service performed as a member of such committee for less than a full 
session in any Congress). All selections of Members to serve on the 
committee shall be made without regard to seniority." 

(b) Rule X of the Rules of the House of Representatives is amended 
by adding at the end thereof the following new clause: 
"6. For carrying out the purposes set forth in clause 5 of Rule XI, 
the Committee on the Budget or any subcommittee thereof is authorized 
to sit and act at such times and places within the United States, 
whether the House is in session, has recessed, or has adjourned, to hold 
such hearings, to require the attendance of such witnesses and the production 
of such books or papers or documents or vouchers by subpena 
or otherwise, and to take such testimony and records, as it deems necessary. 
Subpenas may be issued over the signature of the chairman of 
the committee or of any member of the committee designated by him; 
and may be served by any person designated by such chairman or 
member. The chairman of the committee, or any member thereof, may 
administer oaths to witnesses." 

(c) Rule X I of the Rules of the House of Representatives is 
amended by redesignating clauses 5 through 33 as clauses 6 through 34, 
respectively, and by inserting after clause 4 the following new clause: 
"5. Committee on the Budget 

"(a) All concurrent resolutions on the budget (as defined in section 
3(a)(4) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974) and other 
matters required to be referred to the committee under titles III and 
IV of that Act. 

" (b) The committee shall have the duty— 
"(1) to report the matters required to be reported by it under 
titles III and IV of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974; 

"(2) to make continuing studies of the effect on budget outlays 
of relevant existing and proposed legislation and to report the 
results of such studies to the House on a recurring basis; 

" (3) to request and evaluate continuing studies of tax expenditures, 
to devise methods of coordinating tax expenditures, policies, 
and programs with direct budget outlays, and to report the results 
of such studies to the House on a recurring basis; and 

"(4) to review, on a continuing basis, the conduct by the Congressional 
Budget Office of its functions and duties." 

BUDGET COMMITTEE OF THE SENATE 

SEC. 102. (a) Paragraph 1 of rule XXV of the Standing Rules of 
the Senate is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new 
subparagraph: 

"(r) (1) Committee on the Budget, to which committee shall be 
referred all concurrent resolutions on the budget (as defined in section 
3(a) (4) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974) and all other matters 
required to be referred to that committee under titles III and IV 
of that Act, and messages, petitions, memorials, and other matters 
relating thereto. 


88 STAT.] PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 

"(2) Such committee shall have the duty— Duties. 
"(A) to report the matters required to be reported by it under 
titles III and IV of the Congessional Budget Act of 1974 ; 

"(B) to make continuing studies of the effect on budget outlays 
of relevant existing and proposed legislation and to report the 
results of such studies to the Senate on a recurring basis; 

"(C) to request and evaluate continuing studies of tax expenditures, 
to devise methods of coordinating tax expenditures, policies, 
and programs with direct budget outlays, and to report the results 
of such studies to the Senate on a recurring basis; and 

"(D) to review, on a continuing basis, the conduct by the Congressional 
Budget Office of its functions and duties." 

(b) The table contained in paragraph 2 of rule XXV of the Standing 
Rules of the Senate is amended by inserting after— 
"Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs : 15" 
the following: 
"Budget ^—: 15". 

(c) Paragraph 6 of rule XXV of the Standing Rules of the Senate 
is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new 
subparagraph: 
"(h) For purposes of the first sentence of subparagraph (a), membership 
on the Committee on the Budget shall not be taken into 
account until that date occurring during the first session of the Ninety-
fifth Congress, upon which the appointment of the majority and 
minority party members of the standing committees of the Senate is 
initially completed." 

(d) Each meeting of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate, ^e^^rngs?"* '^'"'^'^ 
or any subcommittee thereof, including meetings to conduct hearings, 2 use i90a-3. 
shall be open to the public, except that a portion or portions of any 
such meeting may be closed to the public if the committee or subcommittee, 
as the case may be, determines by record vote of a majority of 
the members of the committee or subcommittee present that the matters 
to be discussed or the testimony to be taken at such portion or 
portions— 
(1) will disclose matters necessary to be kept secret in the interests 
of national defense or the confidential conduct of the foreign 
relations of the United States; 
(2) will relate solely to matters of committee staff personnel or 
internal staff management or procedure; 
(3) will tend to charge an individual with crime or misconduct, 
to disgrace or injure the professional standing of an individual, 
or otherwise to expose an individual to public contempt or 
obloquy, or will represent a clearly unwarranted invasion of the 
privacy of an individual; 
(4) will disclose the identity of any informer or law enforcement 
agent or will disclose any information relating to the investigation 
or prosecution of a criminal offense that is required to be 
kept secret in the interests of effective law enforcement; or 
(5) will disclose information relating to the trade secrets or 
financial or commercial information pertaining specifically to a 
given person if— 

PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT. 

2 use 190a-l 

note. 
2 use 190a-l, 

2 use 601. 

Appointment. 

Removal. 
Compensation. 

Appointment 

and compensa


tion. 

(A) an Act of Congress requires the information to be 
kept confidential by Government officers and employees; or 
(B) the information has been obtained by the Government 
on a confidential basis, other than through an application by 
such person for a specific Government financial or other benefit, 
and is required to be kept secret in order to prevent undue 
injury to the competitive position of such person. 
(e) Paragraph 7(b) of rule XXV of the Standing Rules of the 
Senate and section 133A (b) of the Legislative Reorganization Act of 
1946 shall not apply to the Committee on the Budget of the Senate. 
TITLE II—CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE 

ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE 

SEC. 201. (a) Ix GENERAL.— 

(1) There is established an office of the Congress to be known 
as the Congressional Budget Office (hereinafter in this title 
referred to as the "Office"). The Office shall be headed by a Director 
; and there shall be a Deputy Director who shall perform such 
duties as may be assigned to him by the Director and, during the 
absence or incapacity of the Director or during a vacancy in that 
office, shall act as Director. 
(2) The Director shall be appointed by the Speaker of the 
House of Representatives and the President pro tempore of the 
Senate after considering recommendations received from the 
Committees on the Budget of the House and the Senate, without 
regard to political affiliation and solely on the basis of his fitness 
to perform his duties. The Deputy Director shall be appointed by 
the Director. 
(3) The term of office of the Director first appointed shall 
expire at noon on January 3,1979, and the terms of office of Directors 
subsequently appointed shall expire at noon on January 3 of 
each fourth year thereafter. Any individual appointed as Director 
to fill a vacancy prior to the expiration of a term shall serve 
only for the unexpired portion of that term. An individual serving 
as Director at the expiration of a term may continue to serve 
until his successor is appointed. Any Deputy Director shall serve 
until the expiration of the term of office of the Director who 
appointed him (and until his successor is appointed), unless 
sooner removed by the Director. 
(4) The Director may be removed by either House by 
resolution. 
(5) The Director shall receive compensation at a per annum 
gross rate equal to the rate of basic pay, as in effect from time 
to time, for level II I of the Executive Schedule in section 5314 
of title 5, United States Code. The Deputy Director shall receive 
compensation at a per annum gross rate equal to the rate of basic 
pay, as so in effect, for level IV of the Executive Schedule in 
section 5315 of such title. 
(b) PERSONNEL.—^^The Director shall appoint and fix the compensation 
of such personnel as may be necessary to carry out the duties and 
functions of the Office. All personnel of the Office shall be appointed 
without regard to political affiliation and solely on the basis of their 
fitness to perform their duties. The Director may prescribe the duties 
and responsibilities of the personnel of the Office, and delegate to them 
authority to perform any of the duties, powers, and functions imposed 

88 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 

on the Office or on the Director. For purposes of pay (other than pay 
of the Director and Deputy Director) and employment benefits, rights, 
and privileges, all personnel of the Office shall be treated as if they 
were employees of the House of Representatives. 

(c) EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.—In carrying out the duties and 
functions of the Office, the Director may procure the temporary (not 
to exceed one year) or intermittent services of experts or consultants 
or organizations thereof by contract as independent contractors, or, 
in the case of individual experts or consultants, by employment at rates 
of pay not in excess of the daily equivalent of the highest rate of basic 
pay payable under the General Schedule of section 5332 of title 5, 
United States Code. JJ^^ 5332 
(d) RELATIONSHIP TO EXECUTIVE BRANCH.—The Director is author- "°Da'ta, avaiiized 
to secure information, data, estimates, and statistics directly from ability. 
the various departments, agencies, and establishments of the executive 
branch of Government and the regulatory agencies and commissions 
of the Government. All such departments, agencies, establishments, 
and regulatory agencies and commissions shall furnish the Director 
any available material which he determines to be necessary in the 
performance of his duties and functions (other than material the 
disclosure of which would be a violation of law). The Director is 
also authorized, upon agreement with the head of any such department, 
agency, establishment, or regulatory agency or commission, to 
utilize its services, facilities, and personnel with or without reimbursement 
; and the head of each such department, agency, establishment, 
or regulatory agency or commission is authorized to provide the Office 
such services, facilities, and personnel. 
(e) RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER AGENCIES OF CONGRESS,—In carrying 
out the duties and functions of the Office, and for the purpose of coordinating 
the operations of the Office with those of other congressional 
agencies with a view to utilizing most effectively the information, 
services, and capabilities of all such agencies in carrying out the various 
responsibilities assigned to each, the Director is authorized to 
obtain information, data, estimates, and statistics developed by the „ ^'^°' ""'^f/^ "^ 
/-^ 1 * • /^/r» j^i T •! /• >^ T 1 y^ nn it <-0ngress. Office 

General Accounting Omce, the Library of Congress, and the Office of of Technology 
Technology Assessment, and (upon agreement with them) to utilize ^/fa^cume"s' "^^ 
their services, facilities, and personnel with or without reimbursement. 
The Comptroller General, the Librarian of Congress, and the 
Technology Assessment Board are authorized to provide the Office 
with the information, data, estimates, and statistics, and the services, 
facilities, and personnel, referred to in the preceding sentence. 

(f) APPROPRIATIONS.—There are authorized to be appropriated to 
the Office for each fiscal year such sums as may be necessary to enable 
it to carry out its duties and functions. Until sums are first appropriated 
pursuant to the preceding sentence, but for a period not exceeding 
12 months following the effective date of this subsection, the expenses 
of the Office shall be paid from the contingent fund of the Senate, in 
accordance with the paragraph relating to the contingent fund of the 
Senate under the heading "UNDER LEGISLATIVE" in the Act of 
October 1, 1888 (28 Stat. 546; 2 U.S.C. 68), and upon vouchers 
approved by the Director. 

304 
2 use 602. 

Repeal. 
31 use 571 

 PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT. 

DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS 

gE(._ 202. (a) ASSISTANCE TO BUDGET COMMITTEES.—It shall be the 
duty and function of the Office to provide to the Committees on the 
Budget of both Houses information which will assist such committees 
in the discharge of all matters within their jurisdictions, including 

(1) information with respect to the budget, appropriation bills, and 
other bills authorizing or providing budget authority or tax expenditures, 
(2) information with respect to revenues, receipts, estimated 
future revenues and receipts, and changing revenue conditions, and 
(3) such related information as such Committees may request. 
(b) ASSISTANCE TO COMMITTEES ON APPROPRIATIONS, WAYS AND 
MEANS, AND FINANCE.—At the request of the Committee on Appropriations 
of either House, the Committee on Ways and Means of the House 
of Representatives, or the Committee on Finance of the Senate, the 
Office shall provide to such Committee any information which will 
assist it in the discharge of matters within its jurisdiction, including 
information described in clauses (1) and (2) of subsection (a) and 
such related information as the Committee may request. 
(c) ASSISTANCE TO OTHER COMMITTEES AND MEMBERS.— 
(1) At the request of any other committee of the House of Representatives 
or the Senate or any joint committee of the Congress, 
the Office shall provide to such committee or joint committee any 
information compiled in carrying out clauses (1) and (2) of subsection 
(a), and, to the extent practicable, such additional information 
related to the foregoing as may be requested. 
(2) At the request of any Member of the House or Senate, the 
Office shall provide to such Member any information compiled in 
carrying out clauses (1) and (2) of subsection (a), and, to the 
extent available, such additional information related to the foregoing 
as may be requested. 
(d) ASSIGNMENT OF OFFICE PERSONNEL TO COMMITTEES AND JOINT 
COMMITTEES.—^At the request of the Committee on the Budget of either 
House, personnel of the Office shall be assigned, on a temporary basis, 
to assist such committee. At the request of any other committee of 
either House or any joint committee of the Congress, personnel of the 
Office may be assigned, on a temporary basis, to assist such committee 
or joint committee with respect to matters directly related to the 
applicable provisions of subsection (b) or (c). 
(e) TRANSFER OF FUNCTIONS OF JOINT COMMITTEE ON REDUCTION OF 
P^EDERAL EXPENDITURES.— 
(1) The duties, functions, and personnel of the Joint Committee 
on Reduction of Federal Expenditures are transferred to the 
Office, and the Joint Committee is abolished. 
(2) Section 601 of the Revenue Act of 1941 (55 Stat. 726) is 
repealed. 
(f) REPORTS TO BUDGET COMMITTEES.— 
(1) On or before April 1 of each year, the Director shall submit 
to the Committees on the Budget of the House of Representatives 
and the Senate a report, for the fiscal year commencing on 
October 1 of that year, with respect to fiscal policy, including (A) 
alternative levels of total revenues, total new budget authority, 
and total outlays (including related surpluses and deficits), and 
(B) the levels of tax expenditures under existing law, taking into 
account projected economic factors and any changes in such levels 
based on proposals in the budget submitted by the President for 
such fiscal year. Such report shall also include a discussion of 
national budget priorities, including alternative ways of allocating 

88 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 

budget authority and budget outlays for such fiscal year among 
major programs or functional categories, taking into account 
how such alternative allocations will meet major national needs 
and affect balanced growth and development of the United States. 

(2) The Director shall from time to time submit to the Com- ^ut^^'J^f^^^dg^rt 
mittees on the Budget of the House of Representatives and the committees. 
Senate such further reports (including reports revising the 
report required by paragraph (1)) as may be necessary or appropriate 
to provide such Committees with information, data, and 
analyses for the performance of their duties and functions, 
(g) USE OF COMPUTERS AND OTHER TECHNIQUES.—The Director 
may equip the Office with up-to-date computer capability (upon 
approval of the Committee on House Administration of the House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Rules and Administration of 
the Senate), obtain the services of experts and consultants in computer Experts and 
technology, and develop techniques for the evaluation of budgetary 
requirements. 
PUBLIC ACCESS TO BUDGET DATA 

SEC. 203, (a) RIGHT To COPY.—Except as provided in subsections ^ use 603. 

(c) and (d), the Director shall make all information, data, estimates, 
and statistics obtained under sections 201(d) and 201(e) available for 
public copying during normal business hours, subject to reasonable 
rules and regulations, and shall to the extent practicable, at the request 
of any person, furnish a copy of any such information, data, estimates, 
or statistics upon payment by such person of the cost of making and 
furnishing such copy. 
(b) INDEX.—^The Director shall develop and maintain filing, coding, 
and indexing systems that identify the information, data, estimates, 
and statistics to which subsection (a) applies and shall make such 
systems available for public use during normal business hours. 
(c) EXCEPTIONS.—^Subsection (a) shall not apply to information, 
data, estimates, and statistics— 
(1) which are specifically exempted from disclosure by law; or 
(2) which the Director determines will disclose— 
(A) matters necessary to be kept secret in the interests of 
national defense or the confidential conduct of the foreign 
relations of the United States; 
(B) information relating to trade secrets or financial or 
commercial information pertaining specifically to a given 
person if the information has been obtained by the Government 
on a confidential basis, other than through an application 
by such person for a specific financial or other benefit, 
and is required to be kept secret in order to prevent undue 
injury to the competitive position of such person; or 
(C) personnel or medical data or similar data the disclosure 
of which would constitute a clearly unwarranted 
invasion of personal privacy; 
unless the portions containing such matters, information, or data 
have been excised. 

(d) INFORMATION OBTAINED FOR COMMITTEES AND MEMBERS.—Subsection 
(a) shall apply to any information, data, estimates, and statistics 
obtained at the request of any committee, joint committee, or 
Member unless such committee, joint committee, or Member has 
instructed the Director not to make such information, data, estimates, 
or statistics available for public copying. 

306 PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT. 

31 use 1321. 

31 use 1322. 
eontents. 

TITLE III—CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET PROCESS 

TIMETABLE 

 gj,(3^ 300. The timetable with respect to the congressional budget 

process for any fiscal year is as follows: 

On or before : Action to be completed : 

November 10 President submits current services budget. 
15tli day after Congress meets— President submits his budget. 
Marehi 15 Committees and joint committees submit 

reports to Budget Committees. 
April 1 Congressional Budget OflBce submits report to 
Budget Committees. 
April 15 Budget Committees report first concurrent resolution 
on the budget to their Houses. 
May 15 Committees report bills and resolutions authorizing 
new budget authority. 
May 15 Congress completes action on first concurrent 
resolution on the budget. 

7th day after Labor Day Congress completes action on bills and resolutions 
providing new budget authority and 
new spending authority. 

September 15 Congress completes action on second required 
concurrent resolution on the budget. 

September 25 Congress completes action on reconciliation bill 
or resolution, or both, implementing second 
required concurrent resolution. 

October 1 Fiscal year begins. 

ADOPTION OF FIRST CONCURRENT RESOLUTION 

 gj>c. 301. (a) ACTION TO BE COMPLETED BY MAY 15.—On or before 
May 15 of each year, the Congress shall complete action on the first 
concurrent resolution on the budget for the fiscal year beginning on 
October 1 of such year. The concurrent resolution shall set forth— 

(1) the appropriate level of total budget outlays and of total 
new budget authority; 
(2) an estimate of budget outlays and an appropriate level of 
new budget authority for each major functional category, for 
contingencies, and for undistributed intragovernmental transactions, 
based on allocations of the appropriate level of total budget 
outlays and of total new budget authority; 
(3) the amount, if any, of the surplus or the deficit in the budget 
which is appropriate in light of economic conditions and all other 
relevant factors; 
(4) the recommended level of Federal revenues and the amount, 
if any, by which the aggregate level of Federal revenues should 
be increased or decreased by bills and resolutions to be reported 
by the appropriate committees; 
(5) the appropriate level of the public debt, and the amount, if 
any, by which the statutory limit on the public debt should be 
increased or decreased by bills and resolutions to be reported by 
the appropriate committees; and 
(6) such other matters relating to the budget as may be appropriate 
to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(b) ADDITIONAL MATTERS IN CONCURRENT RESOLUTION.—The first 
concurrent resolution on the budget may also require— 

88 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 

(1) a procedure under which all or certain bills and resolutions 
providing new budget authority or providing new spending 
authority described in section 401(c) (2) (C) for such fiscal year 
shall not be enrolled until the concurrent resolution required to be 
reported under section 310(a) has been agreed to, and, if a reconciliation 
bill or reconciliation resolution, or both, are required to 
be reported under section 310(c), until Congress has completed 
action on that bill or resolution, or both; and 
(2) any other procedure which is considered appropriate to 
carry out the purposes of this Act. 
Not later than the close of the Ninety-fifth Congress, the Committee 
on the Budget of each House shall report to its House on the implementation 
of procedures described in this subsection. 

(c) VIEWS AND ESTIMATES OF OTHER COMMITTEES.—On or before 
March 15 of each year, each standing committee of the House of 
Representatives shall submit to the Committee on the Budget of the 
House, each standing committee of the Senate shall submit to the 
Committee on the Budget of the Senate, and the Joint Economic Committee 
and Joint Committee on Internal Revenue Taxation shall submit 
to the Committees on the Budget of both Houses— 
(1) its views and estimates with respect to all matters set forth 
in subsection (a) which relate to matters within the respective 
jurisdiction or functions of such committee or joint committee; 
and 
(2) except in the case of such joint committees, the estimate 
of the total amounts of new budget authority, and budget outlays 
resulting therefrom, to be provided or authorized in all bills and 
resolutions within the jurisdiction of such committee which such 
committee intends to be effective during the fiscal year beginning 
on October 1 of such year. 
The Joint Economic Committee shall also submit to the Committees 
on the Budget of both Houses, its recommendations as to the fiscal 
policy appropriate to the goals of the Employment Act of 1946. Any 
other committee of the House or Senate may submit to the Committee 
on the Budget of its House, and any other joint committee of the 
Congress may submit to the Committees on the Budget of both Houses, 
its views and estimates with respect to all matters set forth in subsection 
(a) which relate to matters within its jurisdiction or functions. 

(d) HEARINGS AND REPORT.—In developing the first concurrent resolution 
on the budget referred to in subsection (a) for each fiscal year, 
the Committee on the Budget of each House shall hold hearings and 
shall receive testimony from Members of Congress and such appropriate 
representatives of Federal departments and agencies, the general 
public, and national organizations as the committee deems 
desirable. On or before April 15 of each year, the Committee on the 
Budget of each House shall report to its House the first concurrent 
resolution on the budget referred to in subsection (a) for the fiscal 
year beginning on October 1 of such year. The report accompanying 
such concurrent resolution shall include, but not be limited to— 
(1) a comparison of revenues estimated by the committee with 
those estimated in the budget submitted by the President; 
(2) a comparison of the appropriate levels of total budget outlays 
and total new budget authority, as set forth in such 
concurrent resolution, with total budget outlays estimated and 
total new budget authority requested in the budget submitted by 
the President; 
Report to 
Congress, 

Submittal to 
congressional 
committees. 

15 use 1021 
note. 

Concurrent resolution, 
development. 


Report to 
Congress. 


31 use 1323. 

Subdivisions. 

 PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT. 

(3) with respect to each major functional category, an estimate 
of budget outlays and an appropriate level of new budget authority 
for all proposed programs and for all existing programs 
(including renewals thereof), with the estimate and level for 
existing programs being divided between permanent authority 
and funds provided in appropriation Acts, and each such division 
being subdivided between controllable amounts and all other 
amounts; 
(4) an allocation of the level of Federal revenues recommended 
in the concurrent resolution among the major sources of such 
revenues; 
(5) the economic assumptions and objectives which underlie 
each of the matters set forth in such concurrent resolution and 
alternative economic assumptions and objectives which the committee 
considered; 
(6) projections, not limited to the following, for the period of 
five fiscal years beginning with such fiscal year of the estimated 
levels of total budget outlays, total new budget outlays, total new 
budget authority, the estimated revenues to be received, and the 
estimated surplus or deficit, if any, for each fiscal year in such 
period, and the estimated levels of tax expenditures (the tax 
expenditures budget) by major functional categories; 
(7) a statement of any significant changes in the proposed 
levels of Federal assistance to State and local governments; and 
(8) information, data, and comparisons indicating the manner 
in which, and the basis on which, the committee determined each 
of the matters set forth in the concurrent resolution, and the relationship 
of such matters to other budget categories. 
MATTERS TO BE INCLUDED IN JOINT STATEMENT OF MANAGERS; 

REPORTS BY COMMITTEES 

 ;gj,Q 302. (a) ALLOCATION OF TOTALS.—^The joint explanatory statement 
accompanying a conference report on a concurrent resolution QD. 
the budget shall include an estimated allocation, based upon such 
concurrent resolution as recommended in such conference report, of 
the appropriate levels of total budget outlays and total new budget 
authority among each committee of the House of Representatives and 
the Senate which has jurisdiction over bills and resolutions providing 
such new budget authority. 

^-[y-^ REPORTS BY COMMITTEES.—As soon as practicable after a concurrent 
resolution on the budget is agreed to— 

(1) the Committee on Appropriations of each House shall, after 
consulting with the Committee on Appropriations of the other 
House, (A) subdivide among its subcommittees the allocation of 
budget outlays and new budget authority allocated to it in the 
joint explanatory statement accompanying the conference report 
on such concurrent resolution, and (B) further subdivide the 
amount with respect to each such subcommittee between controllable 
amounts and all other amounts; and 
(2) every other committee of the House and Senate to which 
an allocation was made in such joint explanatory statement shall, 
after consulting with the committee or committees of the other 
House to which all or part of its allocation was made, (A) subdivide 
such allocation among its subcommittees or among programs 
over which it has jurisdiction, and (B) further subdivide 
the amount with respect to each subcommittee or program between 
controllable amounts and all other amounts. 

88 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 309 

Each such committee shall promptly report to its House the subdivi- com°r^nees'°"^^ 
sions made by it pursuant to this subsection. report of sub


(c) SUBSEQUENT CONCURBENT RESOLUTIONS.—In the case of a concur- divisions. 
rent resolution on the budget referred to in section 304 or 310, the 
allocation under subsection (a) and the subdivisions under subsection 
(b) shall be required only to the extent necessary to take into account 
revisions made in the most recently agreed to concurrent resolution 
on the budget. 
FIRST CONCURRENT RESOLUTION ON THE BUDGET MUST BE ADOPTED BEFORE 
LEGISLATION PROVIDING NEW BUDGET AUTHORITY, NEW SPENDING 
AUTHORITY, OR CHANGES IN REVENUES OR PUBLIC DEBT LIMIT IS CONSIDERED 


SEC. 303. (a) IN GENERAL.—It shall not be in order in either the ^^ "^^ ^^^^• 
House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any bill or resolution 
(or amendment thereto) which provides— 

(1) new budget authority for a fiscal year; 
(2) an increase or decrease in revenues to become effective 
during a fiscal year; 
(3) an increase or decrease in the public debt limit to become 
effective during a fiscal year; or 
(4) new spending authority described in section 401(c) (2) (C) 
to become effective during a fiscal year; 
until the first concurrent resolution on the budget for such year has 
been agreed to pursuant to section 301. 

(b) EXCEPTIONS.—^Subsection (a) does not apply to any bill or 
resolution— 
(1) providing new budget authority which first becomes available 
in a fiscal year following the fiscal year to which the concurrent 
resolution applies; or 
(2) increasing or decreasing revenues which first become effective 
in a fiscal year following the fiscal year to which the concurrent 
resolution applies. 
(c) WAIVER IN THE SENATE.— 
(1) The committee of the Senate which reports any bill or resolution 
to which subsection (a) applies may at or after the time it 
reports such bill or resolution, report a resolution to the Senate 
(A) providing for the waiver of subsection (a) with respect to 
such bill or resolution, and (B) stating the reasons why the 
waiver is necessary. The resolution shall then be referred to the fe^ai°^"*^°" ^^' 
Committee on the Budget of the Senate. That committee shall 
report the resolution to the Senate within 10 days after the res- ^ Report to 
• • • *'^ Senate 

olution is referred to it (not counting any day on which the 
Senate is not in session) beginning with the day following the day 
on which it is so referred, accompanied by that committee's recommendations 
and reasons for such recommendations with respect 
to the resolution. If the committee does not report the resolution 
within such 10-day period, it shall automatically be discharged 
from further consideration of the resolution and the resolution 
shall be placed on the calendar. 

(2) During the consideration of any such resolution, debate ^^^^^^l^' """^ 
shall be limited to one hour, to be equally divided between, and 
controlled by, the majority leader and minority leader or their 
designees, and the time on any debatable motion or appeal shall 
be limited to twenty minutes, to be equally divided between, and 
controlled by, the mover and the manager of the resolution. In the 
event the manager of the resolution is in favor of any such motion 
38-194 O - 76 - 23 Pt. 1 


31 use 1325. 

31 use 1326. 

Debate, time 

limits tiori 

 PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT. 

or appeal, the time in opposition thereto shall be controlled by the 
minority leader or his designee. Such leaders, or either of them, 
may, from the time under their control on the passage of such 
resolution, allot additional time to any Senator during the consideration 
of any debatable motion or appeal. No amendment to 
the resolution is in order. 

(3) If, after the Committee on the Budget has reported (or 
been discharged from further consideration of) the resolution, 
the Senate agrees to the resolution, then subsection (a) of this 
section shall not apply with respect to the bill or resolution to 
which the resolution so agreed to applies. 
PERMISSIBLE REVISIONS OF CONCURRENT RESOLUTIONS OF THE BUDGET 

SEC. 304. At any time after the first concurrent resolution on the 
budget for a fiscal year has been agreed to pursuant to section 301, and 
before the end of such fiscal year, the two Houses may adopt a concurrent 
resolution on the budget which revises the concurrent resolution 
on the budget for such fiscal year most recently agreed to. 

PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE CONSIDERATION OF CONCURRENT 
RESOLUTIONS ON THE BUDGET 

 gj,(^ 3Q5 ^^^ PROCEDURE IN HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES AFTER 

REPORT OF COMMITTEE; DEBATE.— 

(1) When the Committee on the Budget of the House has 
reported any concurrent resolution on the budget, it is in order 
at any time after the tenth day (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, 
and legal holidays) following the day on which the report upon 
such resolution has been available to Members of the House (even 
though a previous motion to the same effect has been disagreed 
to) to move to proceed to the consideration of the concurrent resolution. 
The motion is highly privileged and is not debatable. An 
amendment to the motion is not in order, and it is not in order to 
move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or 
disagreed to. 
(£) General debate on any concurrent resolution on the budget 

• -»-• • • 

in the House of Representatives shall be limited to not more than 
10 hours, which shall be divided equally between the majority and 
minority parties. A motion further to limit debate is not debatable. 
A motion to recommit the concurrent resolution is not in 
order, and it is not in order to move to reconsider the vote by 
which the concurrent resolution is agreed to or disagreed to. 

(3) Consideration of any concurrent resolution on the budget 
by the House of Representatives shall be in the Committee of the 
Whole, and the resolution shall be read for amendment under the 
five-minute rule in accordance with the applicable provisions of 
rule XXIII of the Rules of the House of Representatives. After 
the Committee rises and reports the resolution back to the House, 
the previous question shall be considered as ordered on the resolution 
and any amendments thereto to final passage without intervening 
motion; except that it shall be in order at any time prior 
to final passage (notwithstanding any other rule or provision of 
law) to adopt an amendment (or a series of amendments) changing 
any figure or figures in the resolution as so reported to the 
extent necessary to achieve mathematical consistency. 

88 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 

(4) Debate in the House of Eepresentatives on the conference 
report on any concurrent resolution on the budget shall be limited 
to not more than 5 hours, which shall be divided equally between 
the majority and minority parties. A motion further to limit 
debate is not debatable. A motion to recommit the conference 
report is not in order, and it is not in order to move to reconsider 
the vote by which the conference report is agreed to or disagreed 
to. 
(5) Motions to postpone, made with respect to the consideration 
of any concurrent resolution on the budget, and motions to proceed 
to the consideration of other business, shall be decided without 
debate. 
(6) Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the 
application of the Rules of the House of Representatives to the 
procedure relating to any concurrent resolution on the budget 
shall be decided without debate. 
(b) PROCEDURE IN SENATE AFTER REPORT or COMMTFTEE; DEBATE; 
AMENDMENTS.— 
(1) Debate in the Senate on any concurrent resolution on the 
budget, and all amendments thereto and debatable motions and 
appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more 
than 50 hours, except that, with respect to the second required 
concurrent resolution referred to in section 310(a), all such debate 
shall be limited to not more than 15 hours. The time shall be 
equally divided between, and controlled by, the majority leader 
and the minority leader or their designees. 
(2) Debate in the Senate on any amendment to a concurrent 
resolution on the budget shall be limited to 2 hours, to be equally 
divided between, and controlled by, the mover and the manager 
of the concurrent resolution, and debate on any amendment to an 
amendment, debatable motion, or appeal shall be limited to 1 hour, 
to be equally divided between, and controlled by, the mover and 
the manager of the concurrent resolution, except that in the event 
the manager of the concurrent resolution is in favor of any such 
amendment, motion, or appeal, the time in opposition thereto 
shall be controlled by the minority leader or his designee. No 
amendment that is not germane to the provisions of such concurrent 
resolution shall be received. Such leaders, or either of 
them, may, from the time under their control on the passage of 
the concurrent resolution, allot additional time to any Senator 
during the consideration of any amendment, debatable motion, 
or appeal. 
(3) A motion to further limit debate is not debatable. A 
motion to recommit (except a motion to recommit with instructions 
to report back within a specified number of days, not to 
exceed 3, not counting any day on which the Senate is not in 
session) is not in order. Debate on any such motion to recommit 
shall be limited to 1 hour, to be equally divided between, and 
controlled by, the mover and the manager of the concurrent 
resolution. 
(4) Notwithstanding any other rule, an amendment, or series 
of amendments, to a concurrent resolution on the budget proposed 
in the Senate shall always be in order if such amendment or series 
of amendments proposes to change any figure or figures then contained 
in such concurrent resolution so as to make such concurrent 
resolution mathematically consistent or so as to maintain such 
consistencyj.^
f^g^/J^ ''""^ 

 Debate^ time 

limitation. 


312 PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT. 

Debate, time 

Conference recongre"
s?^ a o 

(c) ACTION ON CONFERENCE EEPORTS IN THE SENATE.— 
(1) The conference report on any concurrent resolution on the 
budget shall be in order iii the Senate at any time after the third 
day (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays) following 
the day on which such a conference report is reported and is 
available to Members of the Senate. A motion to proceed to the 
consideration of the conference report may be made even though a 
previous motion to the same effect has been disagreed to. 
^2) Duriug the Consideration in the Senate of the conference 
report on any concurrent resolution on the budget, debate shall be 
limited to 10 hours, to be equally divided between, and controlled 
by, the majority leader and minority leader or their designees. 
Debate on any debatable motion or appeal related to the conference 
report shall be limited to 1 hour, to be equally divided 
between, and controlled by, the mover and the manager of the 
conference report. 

(3) Should the conference report be defeated, debate on any 
T'oquest for a new conference and the appointment of conferees 
shall be limited to 1 hour, to be equally divided between, and 
controlled by, the manager of the conference report and the 
minority leader or his designee, and should any motion be made 
to instruct the conferees before the conferees are named, debate 
on such motion shall be limited to one-half hour, to be equally 
divided between, and controlled by, the mover and the manager 
of the conference report. Debate on any amendment to any such 
instructions shall be limited to 20 minutes, to be equally divided 
between and controlled by the mover and the manager of the conference 
report. In all cases when the manager of the conference 
report is in favor of any motion, appeal, or amendment, the time 
in opposition shall be under the control of the minority leader or 
his designee. 
(4) In any case in which there are amendments in disagreement, 
time on each amendment shall be limited to 30 minutes, to 
be equally divided between, and controlled by, the manager of the 
conference report and the minority leader or his designee. No 
amendment that is not germane to the provisions of such amendments 
shall be received. 
((J) REQUIRED ACTION BY CONFERENCE COMMITTEE. If, at the end of 

-^^^^ (cxcludiiig Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays) after the 
conferees of both Houses have been appointed to a committee of conference 
on a concurrent resolution on the budget, the conferees are 
unable to reach agreement with respect to all matters in disagreement 
between the tAvo Houses, then the conferees shall submit to their 
r-esDective Houses, on the first day thereafter on which their House 
is in session— 
(1) a conference report recommending those matters on which 
they have agreed and reporting in disagreement those matters on 
which they have not agreed; or 
(2) a conference report in disagreement, if the matter in disagreement 
is an amendment Avhich strikes out the entire text of 
the concurrent resolution and inserts a substitute text. 
(e) CONCURRENT RESOLUTION MUST BE CONSISTENT IN THE SENATE.—
It shall not be in order in the Senate to vote on the question of 
agreeing to— 
(i) a concurrent resolution on the budget unless the figures then 
contained in such resolution are mathematically consistent; or 
(2) a conference report on a concurrent resolution on the budget 
unless the figures contained in such resolution, as recommended 
in such conference report, are mathematically consistent. 

88 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 

LEGISLATION DEALING WITH CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET MUST BE HANDLED 
BY BUDGET COMMITTEES 

31 use 1327. 

SEC. 306. No bill or resolution, and no amendment to any bill or 
resolution, dealing with any matter which is within the jurisdiction 
of the Committee on the Budget of either House shall be considered 
in that House unless it is a bill or resolution which has been reported 
by the Committee on the Budget of that House (or from the consideration 
of which such committee has been discharged) or unless it is an 
amendment to such a bill or resolution. 

HOUS E COMMITTE E ACTION ON ALL APPROPRIATION BILLS TO BE COMPLETED 
BEFORE FIRST APPROPRIATION BILL IS REPORTED 

31 use 1328. 

SEC. 307. Prior to reporting the first regular appropriation bill for 
each fiscal year, the Committee on Appropriations of the House of 
Representatives shall, to the extent practicable, complete subcommittee 
markup and full committee action on all regular appropriation 
bills for that year and submit to the House a summary report compar- g^^'^^g^t^^^"'''' 
ing the committee's recommendations with the appropriate levels of House. 
budget outlays and new budget authority as set forth in the most 
recently agreed to concurrent resolution on the budget for that year. 

REPORTS, SUMMARIES, AND PROJECTIONS OF CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET 
ACTIONS 

SEC. 308. (a) REPORTS ON LEGISLATION PROVIDING NEW BUDGET ^^ "^c 1329. 
AUTHORITY OR TAX EXPENDITURES.—Whenever a committee of either 
House reports a bill or resolution to its House providing new budget 
authority (other than continuing appropriations) or new or increased 
tax expenditures for a fiscal year, the report accompanying that bill contents. 
or resolution shall contain a statement, prepared after consultation 
with the Director of the Congressional Budget Office, detailing— 

(1) in the case of a bill or resolution providing new budget 
authority— 
(A) how the new budget authority provided in that bill 
or resolution compares with the new budget authority set 
forth in the most recently agreed to concurrent resolution 
on the budget for such fiscal year and the reports submitted 
under section 302; 
(B) a projection for the period of 5 fiscal years beginning 
with such fiscal year of budget outlays, associated with 
the budget authority provided in that bill or resolution, in 
each fiscal year in such period: and 
(C) the new budget authority, and budget outlays resulting 
therefrom, provided by that bill or resolution for financial 
assistance to State and local governments; and 
(2) in the case of a bill or resolution providing new or increased 
tax expenditures— 
(A) how the new or increased tax expenditures provided in 
that bill or resolution will affect the levels of tax expenditures 
under existing law as set forth in the report accompanying 
the first concurrent resolution on the budget for such fiscal 
year, or, if a report accompanying a subsequently agreed to 
concurrent resolution for such year sets forth such levels, 
then as set forth in that report; and 
(B) a projection for the period of 5 fiscal years beginning 
with such fiscal year of the tax expenditures which will result 
from that bill or resolution in each fiscal year in such period. 

314 PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT. 

re ^"4°'^^'^ 
Contents. 

^^p""^*' 

31 use 133 0. 

No projection shall be required for a fiscal year under paragraph (1) 

(B) or (2)(B) if the committee determines that a projection for that 
fiscal year is impracticable and states in its report the reason for such 
impracticability. 
(b) UP-TO-DATE TABULATION OF CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET ACTIONS.— 
The Director of the Congressional Budget Office shall issue periodic 
reports detailing and tabulating the progress of congressional action 
on bills and resolutions providing new budget authority and changing 
reveuucs and the public debt limit for a fiscal year. Such reports shall 
include, but are not limited to— 
(1) an up-to-date tabulation comparing the new budget authority 
for such fiscal year in bills and resolutions on which Congress 
has completed action and estimated outlays, associated with such 
new budget authority, during such fiscal year to the new budget 
authority and estimated outlays set forth in the most recently 
agreed to concurrent resolution on the budget for such fiscal year 
and the reports submitted under section 302; 
(2) an up-to-date status report on all bills and resolutions providing 
new budget authority and changing revenues and the 
public debt limit for such fiscal year in both Houses; 
(3) an up-to-date comparison of the appropriate level of revenues 
contained in the most recently agreed to concurrent resolution 
on the budget for such fiscal year with the latest estimate of 
revenues for such year (including new revenues anticipated 
during such year under bills and resolutions on which the Congress 
has completed action); and 
(4) an up-to-date comparison of the appropriate level of the 
public debt contained in the most recently agreed to concurrent 
resolution on the budget for such fiscal year with the latest estimate 
of the public debt during such fiscal year. 
(c) FIVE-YEAR PROJECTION OF CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET ACTION,—As 
soon as practicable after the beginning of each fiscal year, the Director 
of the Congressional Budget Office shall issue a report projecting for 
the period of 5 fiscal years beginning with such fiscal year— 
(1) total new budget authority and total budget outlays for 
each fiscal year in such period; 
(2) revenues to be received and the major sources thereof, and 
the surplus or deficit, if any, for each fiscal year in such period; 
and 
(3) tax expenditures for each fiscal year in such period. 
COMPLETION OF ACTION ON BILLS PROVIDING NEW BUDGET AUTHORITY 
AND CERTAIN NEW SPENDING AUTHORITY 

gj,(j_ 309, Except as otherwise provided pursuant to this title, not 
later than the seventh day after Labor Day of each year, the Congress 
shall complete action on all bills and resolutions— 

(1) providing new budget authority for the fiscal year beginning 
on October 1 of such year, other than supplemental, deficiency, 
and continuing appropriation bills and resolutions, and 
other than the reconciliation bill for such year, if required to be 
reported under section 310(c) ; and 
(2) providing new spending authority described in section 401 
(c)(2) (C) which is to become effective during such fiscal year. 
Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any bill or resolution if legislation 
authorizing the enactment of new budget authority to be provided in 
such bill or resolution has not been timely enacted. 

88 STAT.] PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JUL Y 12, 1974 315 
SECOND REQUIRED CONCURRENT RESOLUTION AND RECONCILIATION 
PROCESS 
SEC. 310. (a) REPORTING OF CONCURRENT RESOLUTION.—The Com3i 
use 1331. 
mittee on the Budget of each House shall report to its House a concurrent 
resolution on the budget which reaffirms or revises the 
concurrent resolution on the budget most recently agreed to with 
respect to the fiscal year beginning on October 1 of such year. Any such 
concurrent resolution on the budget shall also, to the extent necessary— 
(1) specify the total amount by which— 
(A) new budget authority for such fiscal year; 
(B) budget authority initially provided for prior fiscal 
years; and 
(C) new spending authority described in section 401 (c) (2) 
(C) which is to become effective during such fiscal year, 
contained in laws, bills, and resolutions within the jurisdiction 
of a committee, is to be changed and direct that committee to 
determine and recommend changes to accomplish a change of 
such total amount; 
(2) specify the total amount by which revenues are to be 
changed and direct that the committees having jurisdiction to 
determine and recommend changes in the revenue laws, bills, and 
resolutions to accomplish a change of such total amount; 
(3) specify the amount by which the statutory limit on the 
public debt is to be changed and direct the committees having 
jurisdiction to recommend such change; or 
(4) specify and direct any combination of the matters described 
in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3). 
Any such concurrent resolution may be reported, and the report FiUng. 
accompanying it may be filed, in either House notwithstanding that 
that House is not in session on the day on which such concurrent 
resolution is reported. 
(b) COMPLETION or ACTION ON CONCURRENT RESOLUTION.—Not later 
than September 15 of each year, the Congress shall complete action 
on the concurrent resolution on the budget referred to in subsection 
(a). 
(c) RECONCILIATION PROCESS.—If a concurrent resolution is agreed 
to in accordance with subsection (a) containing directions to one or 
more committees to determine and recommend changes in laws, bills, 
or resolutions, and— 
(1) only one committee of the House or the Senate is directed to 
determine and recommend changes, that committee shall promptly 
make such determination and recommendations and report to its 
House a reconciliation bill or reconciliation resolution, or both, 
containing such recommendations; or 
(2) more than one committee of the House or the Senate is 
directed to determine and recommend changes, each such committee 
so directed shall promptly make such determination and 
recommendations, whether such changes are to be contained in a 
reconciliation bill or reconciliation resolution, and submit such 
recommendations to the Committee on the Budget of its House, 
which upon receiving all such recommendations, shall report to 
its House a reconciliation bill or reconciliation resolution, or both, 
carrying out all such recommendations without any substantive 
revision. 


316 PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT. 

Reconciliation 

resolution. 

Debate, time 
limitation. 

31 use 1332. 

For purposes of this subsection, a reconciliation resolution is a concurrent 
resolution directing the Clerk of the House of Representatives 
or the Secretary of the Senate, as the case may be, to make specified 
changes in bills and resolutions which have not been enrolled. 

(d) COMPLETION OF RECONCILIATION PROCESS.—Congress shall complete 
action on any reconciliation bill or reconciliation resolution 
reported under subsection (c) not later than September 25 of each 
year. 
(e) PROCEDURE IN THE SENATE.— 
(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the provisions of 
section 305 for the consideration in the Senate of concurrent resolutions 
on the budget and conference reports thereon shall also 
apply to the consideration in the Senate of reconciliation bills and 
reconciliation resolutions reported under subsection (c) and conference 
reports thereon. 
(2) Debate in the Senate on any reconciliation bill or resolution 
reported under subsection (c), and all amendments thereto 
and debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall 
be limited to not more than 20 hours. 
(f) CONGRESS MAY NOT ADJOURN UNTIL ACTION IS COMPLETED.—It 
shall not be in order in either the House of Representatives or the 
Senate to consider any resolution providing for the adjournment sine 
die of either House unless action has been completed on the concurrent 
resolution on the budget required to be reported under subsection (a) 
for the fiscal year beginning on October 1 of such year, and, if a 
reconciliation bill or resolution, or both, is required to be reported 
under subsection (c) for such fiscal year, unless the Congress has completed 
action on that bill or resolution, or both. 
NEW BUDGET AUTHORITY, NEW SPENDING AUTHORITY AND REVENUE 
LEGISLATION MUST BE WiTHIN APPROPRIATE LEVELS 

SEC. 311. (a) LEGISLATION SUBJECT TO POINT OF ORDER.—^After the 
Congress has completed action on the concurrent resolution on the 
budget required to be reported under section 310(a) for a fiscal year, 
and, if a reconciliation bill or resolution, or both, for such fiscal year 
are required to be reported under section 310(c), after that bill has 
been enacted into law or that resolution has been agreed to, it shall 
not be in order in either the House of Representatives or the Senate to 
consider any bill, resolution, or amendment providing additional new 
budget authority for such fiscal year, providing new spending authority 
described in section 401(c) (2) (C) to become effective during such 
fiscal year, or reducing revenues for such fiscal year, or any conference 
report on any such bill or resolution, if— 

(1) the enactment of such bill or resolution as reported; 
(2) the adoption and enactment of such amendment; or 
(3) the enactment of such bill or resolution in the form recommended 
in such conference report; 
would cause the appropriate level of total new budget authority or 
total budget outlays set forth in the most recently agreed to concurrent 
resolution on the budget for such fiscal year to be exceeded, or 
would cause revenues to be less than the appropriate level of revenues 
set forth in such concurrent resolution. 

(b) DETERMINATION OF OUTLAYS AND REVENUES.^—For purposes of 
subsection (a), the budget outlays to be made during a fiscal year and 
revenues to be received during a fiscal year shall be determined on the 
basis of estimates made by the Committee on the Budget of the House 
of Representatives or the Senate, as the case may be. 

88 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 317 

TITLE IV—ADDITIONAL PKOVISIONS TO IMPKOVE 
FISCAL PKOCEDURES 

BILLS PROVIDING NEW SPENDING AUTHORITY 

SEC. 401. (a) LEGISLATION PROVIDING CONTRACT OR BORROWING 
AUTHORITY.—It shall not be in order in either the House of Representatives 
or the Senate to consider any bill or resolution which provides 
new spending authority described in subsection (c)(2)(A) or (B) 
(or any amendment which provides such new spending authority), 
unless that bill, resolution, or amendment also provides that such 
new spending authority is to be effective for any fiscal year only to 
such extent or in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts. 

(b) LEGISLATION PROVIDING ENTITLEMENT AUTHORITY.— 
(1) It shall not be in order in either the House of Representatives 
or the Senate to consider any bill or resolution which provides 
new spending authority described in subsection (c)(2)(C) 
(or any amendment which provides such new spending authority) 
which is to become effective before the first day of the fiscal year 
which begins during the calendar year in which such bill or resolution 
is reported. 

(2) If any committee of the House of Representatives or the 
Senate reports any bill or resolution which provides new spending 
authority described in subsection (c) (2) (C) which is to become 
effective during a fiscal year and the amount of new budget authority 
which will be required for such fiscal year if such bill or resolution 
is enacted as so reported exceeds the appropriate allocation of 
new budget authority reported under section 302(b) in connection 
with the most recently agreed to concurrent resolution on the 
budget for such fiscal year, such bill or resolution shall then be 
referred to the Committee on Appropriations of that House with 
instructions to report it, with the committee's recommendations, 
within 15 calendar days (not counting any day on which that 
House is not in session) beginning with the day following the day 
on which it is so referred. If the Committee on Appropriations of 
either House fails to report a bill or resolution referred to it under 
this paragraph within such 15-day period, the committee shall 
automatically be discharged from further consideration of such 
bill or resolution and such bill or resolution shall be placed on the 
appropriate calendar. 
(3) The Committee on Appropriations of each House shall have 
jurisdiction to report any bill or resolution referred to it under 
paragraph (2) with an amendment which limits the total amount 
of new spending authority provided in such bill or resolution. 
(c) DEFINITIONS.— 
(1) For purposes of this section, the term "new spending 
authority" means spending authority not provided by law on the 
effective date of this section, including any increase in or addition 
to spending authority provided by law on such date. 
(2) For purposes of paragraph (1), the term "spending authority" 
means authority (whether temporary or permanent) — 
(A) to enter into contracts under which the United States 
is obligated to make outlays, the budget authority for which 
is not provided in advance by appropriation Acts ; 
(B) to incur indebtedness (other than indebtedness 
incurred under the Second Liberty Bond Act) for the repayment 
of which the United States is liable, the budget authority 
for which is not provided in advance by appropriation Acts; 
and 
31 use 1351. 

Referral to 
Appropriations 
Committee. 

Discharge from 
consideration. 

Placement on 
calendar. 

Committee 
jurisdiction. 

31 use 774. 


318 PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT. 

42 use 1305. 

26 use 1 et 
seq. 

31 use 1221 

note. 

31 use 856. 
31 use 846. 

31 use 1352. 

(C) to make payments (including loans and grants), tlie 
budget authority for which is not provided for in advance 
by appropriation Acts, to any person or government if, under 
the provisions of the law containing such authority, the 
United States is obligated to make such payments to persons 
or governments who meet the requirements established by such 
law. 
Such term does not include authority to insure or guarantee the 
repayment of indebtedness incurred by another person or government, 


(d) EXCEPTIONS.— 
(1) Subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to new spending 
authority if the budget authority for outlays which will result 
from such new spending authority is derived— 
(A) from a trust fund established by the Social Security 
Act (as in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act); 
or 
(B) from any other trust fund, 90 percent or more of the 
receipts of which consist or will consist of amounts (transferred 
from the general fund of the Treasury) equivalent to 
amounts of taxes (related to the purposes for which such 
outlays are or will be made) received in the Treasury under 
specified provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. 
(2) Subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to new spending 
authority which is an amendment to or extension of the State 
and Local Fiscal Assistance Act of 1972, or a continuation of 
the program of fiscal assistance to State and local governments 
provided by that Act, to the extent so provided in the bill or 
resolution providing such authority. 
(3) Subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to new spending 
authority to the extent that— 
(A) the outlays resulting therefrom are made by an organization 
which is (i) a mixed-ownership Government corporation 
(as defined in section 201 of the Government 
Corporation Control Act), or (ii) a wholly owned Government 
corporation (as defined in section 101 of such Act) 
which is specifically exempted by law from compliance with 
any or all of the provisions of that Act; or 
(B) the outlays resulting therefrom consist exclusively of 
the proceeds of gifts or bequests made to the United States 
for a specific purpose. 
REPORTING OF AUTHORIZING LEGISLATION 

gj;(._ 402. (a) REQUIRED REPORTING DATE.—Except as otherwise provided 
in this section, it shall not be in order in either the House of 
Representatives or the Senate to consider any bill or resolution which, 
directly or indirectly, authorizes the enactment of new budget authority 
for a fiscal year, unless that bill or resolution is reported in the 
House or the Senate, as the case may be, on or before May 15 preceding 
the beginning of such fiscal year. 

(b) EMERGENCY WAIVER IN THE HOUSE.—If the Committee on Rules 
of the House of Representatives determines that emergency conditions 
require a waiver of subsection (a) with respect to any bill or resolution, 
such committee may report, and the House may consider and 
adopt, a resolution waiving the application of subsection (a) in the 
case of such bill or resolution. 

88 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 

(c) WAIVER IN THE SENATE.— 
(1) The committee of the Senate which repoits any bill or 
resolution may, at or after the time it reports such bill or resolution, 
report a resolution to the Senate (A) providing for the 
waiver of subsection (a) with respect to such bill or resolution, 
and (B) stating the reasons why the waiver is necessary. The ^^f^^"co^° • 
resolution shall then be referred to the Committee on the Budget " ^^ °"™' 
tee. 

of the Senate. That committee shall report the resolution to the 
Senate, within 10 days after the resolution is referred to it (not senaL"'^' *° 
counting any day on which the Senate is not in session) beginning 
with the day following the day on which it is so referred accompanied 
by that committee's recommendations and reasons for such 
recommendations with respect to the resolution. If the committee ^ Discharge from 
does not report the resolution within such 10-day period, it shall """^^ 
automatically be discharged from further consideration of the 
resolution and the resolution shall be placed on the calendar. caTinda™^"* °" 

(2) During the consideration of any such resolution, debate Debate', time 
shall be limited to one hour, to be equally divided between, and limitation. 
controlled by, the majority leader and the minority leader or their 
designees, and the time on any debatable motion or appeal shall be 
limited to 20 minutes, to be equally divided between, and controlled 
by, the mover and the manager of the resolution. In the 
event the manager of the resolution is in favor of any such motion 
or appeal, the time in opposition thereto shaU be controlled by 
the minority leader or his designee. Such leaders, or either of 
them, may, from the time under their control on the passage of 
such resolution, allot additional time to any Senator during the 
consideration of any debatable motion or appeal. Xo amendment 
to the resolution is in order. 
(3) If, after the Committee on the Budget has reported (or 
been discharged from further consideration of) the resolution, the 
Senate agrees to the resolution, then subsection (a) of this section 
shall not apply with respect to that bill or resolution referred to 
in the resolution. 
(d) CERTAIN BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS RECEIVED FROM OTHER 
HOUSE.—Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), if under 
that subsection it is in order in the House of Representatives to consider 
a bill or resolution of the House, then it shall be in order to 
consider a companion or similar bill or resolution of the Senate; and if 
under that subsection it is in order in the 'Senate to consider a bill or 
resolution of the Senate, then it shall be in order to consider a companion 
or similar bill of the House of Representatives. 
(e) EXCEPTIONS.— 
(1) Subsection (a) shall not apply with respect to new spending 
authority described in section 401(c)(2)(C). 
(2) Subsection (a) shall not apply with respect to new budget 
authority authorized in a bill or resolution for any provision of 
the Social Security Act if such bill or resolution also provides 
new spending authority described in section 401(c)(2)(C) 
which, under section 401(d) (1) (A), is excluded from the application 
of section 401(b). 
(f) STUDY OF EXISTING SPENDING AUTHORITY AND PERMANENT 
APPROPRIATIONS.—^The Committees on Appropriations of the House of 
Representatives and the Senate shall study on a continuing basis those 
provisions of law, in effect on the effective date of this section, which 
provide spending authority or permanent budget authority. Each ^^n^ r^*'° 
committee shall, from time to time, report to its House its recommendations 
for terminating or modifying such provisions. 

31 use 1353. 

Submittal to 
congressional 

commmeesT' 

Post. p. 322. 

 PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT. 

ANALYSIS BY CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE 

SEC. 403. The Director of the Congressional Budget Office shall, to 
the extent practicable, prepare for each bill or resolution of a public 
character reported by any committee of the House of Representatives 
or the Senate (except the Committee on Appropriations of each 
House), and submit to such committee— 

 (1) au cstimatc of the costs which would be incurred in carrying 
out such bill or resolution in the fiscal year in which it is to 
become effective and in each of the 4 fiscal years following 
such fiscal year, together with the basis for each such estimate; 
and 
(2) a comparison of the estimate of costs described in paragraph 
(1) with any available estimate of costs made by such 
committee or by any Federal agency. 
The estimate and comparison so submitted shall be included in the 
report accompanying such bill or resolution if timely submitted to 
such committee before such report is filed. 

JURISDICTION OF APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEES 

SEC. 404. (a) AMENDMENT OF HOUSE RULES.—Clause 2 of rule XI of 
the Rules of the House of Representatives is amended by redesignating 
paragraph (b) as paragraph (e) and by inserting after paragraph (a) 
the following new paragraphs: 

"(b) Rescission of appropriations contained in appropriation Acts 

 preferred to in section 105 of title 1, United States Code). 

"(c) The amount of new spending authority described in section 
401(c)(2) (A) and (B) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 
which is to be effective for a fiscal year. 

"(d) New spending authority described in section 401(c)(2)(C) 
of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 provided in bills and resolutions 
referred to the committee under section 401(b) (2) of that Act 
(but subject to the provisions of section 401(b) (3) of that Act)." 

(b) AMENDMENT OF SENATE RULES.—Subparagraph (c) of paragraph 
1 of rule XXV of the Standing Rules of the Senate is amended 
to read as follows: 
"(c) Committee on Appropriations, to which committee shall be 
referred all proposed legislation, messages, petitions, memorials, and 
other matters relating to the following subjects: 

"1. Except as provided in subparagraph (r), appropriation of the 
levenue for the support of the Government. 
"2. Rescission of appropriations contained in appropriation Acts 
(referred to in section 105 of title 1, United States Code). 
"3. The amount of new spending authority described in section 401 

(c) (2) (A) and (B) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 provided 
in bills and resolutions referred to the committee under section 
401(b) (2) of that Act (but subject to the provisions of section 401 
(b)(3) of that Act). 
"4. New advance spending authority described in section 401(c) 

(2) (C) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 provided in bills 
and resolutions referred to the committee under section 401(b) (2) of 
that Act (but subject to the provisions of section 401(b) (3) of that 
Act)." 

88 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 

TITLE V—CHANGE OF FISCAL YEAR 

FISCAL YEAR TO BEGIN OCTOBER 1 

SEC. 501. Section 237 of the Revised Statutes (31 U.S.C. 1020) is 
amended to read as follows: 

"SEC. 237. (a) The fiscal year of the Treasury of the United States, 
in all matters of accounts, receipts, expenditures, estimates, and 
appropriations— 

" (1) shall, through June 30, 1976, commence on July 1 of each 

year and end on June 30 of the following year; and 

"(2) shall, beginning on October 1, 1976, commence on October 

1 of each year and end on September 30 of the following year. 

"(b) All accounts of receipts and expenditures required by law to 
be published annually shall be prepared and published for each fiscal 
year as established by subsection (a)." 

TRANSITION TO NEW FISCAL YEAR 

SEC. 502. (a) As soon as practicable, the President shall prepare 
and submit to the Congress— 

(1) after consultation with the Committees on Appropriations 
of the House of Representatives and the Senate, budget estimates 
for the United States Government for the period commencing 
July 1, 1976, and ending on September 30, 1976, in such 
form and detail as he may determine; and 
(2) proposed legislation he considers appropriate with respect 
to changes in law necessary to provide authorizations of appropriations 
for that period. 
(b) The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall 
provide by regulation, order, or otherwise for the orderly transition 
by all departments, agencies, and instrumentalities of the United 
States Government and the government of the District of Columbia 
from the use of the fiscal year in effect on the date of enactment of 
this Act to the use of the new fiscal year prescribed by section 237 
(a)(2) of the Revised Statutes. The Director shall prepare and submit 
to the Congress such additional proposed legislation as he considers 
necessary to accomplish this objective. 
(c) The Director of the Office of Management and Budget and 
the Director of the Congressional Budget Office jointly shall conduct 
a study of the feasibility and advisability of submitting the Budget 
or portions thereof, and enacting new budget authority or portions 
thereof, for a fiscal year during the regular session of the Congress 
which begins in the year preceding the year in which such fiscal year 
begins. The Director of the Office of Management and Budget and 
the Director of the Congressional Budget Office each shall submit a 
report of the results of the study conducted by them, together with 
his own conclusions and recommendations, to the Congress not later 
than 2 years after the effective date of this subsection. 
ACCOUNTING PROCEDURES 

SEC. 503. (a) Subsection (a) (1) of the first section of the Act 
entitled "An Act to simplify accounting, facilitate the payment of 
obligations, and for other purposes", approved July 25, 1956, as 
amended (31 U.S.C. 701), is amended to read as follows: 

accounts, an


al publication. 

31 use 1020 
note. 

Budget estimates 
and proposed 
legislation, 
submittal to 
Congress. 

Supra. 

Study. 

Reports, submittal 
to Congress. 



322 PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT. 

Transfers. 
31 use 701 

Withdrawals. 

31 use 102 0a. 

f^u^s^c'ios^noU 

"(1) The obligated balance shall be transferred, at the time 
specified in subsection (b) (1) of this section, to an appropriation 
account of the agency or subdivision thereof responsible for the 
liquidation of the obligation, in which account shall be merged 
the amounts so transferred from all appropriation accounts for 
the same general purposes; and", 

(b) Subsection (b) of such section is amended to read as follows: 
"(b) (1) Any obligated balance referred to in subsection (a) (1) of 
this section shall be transferred as follows: 
"(A) for any fiscal year or years ending on or before June 30, 
1976, on that June 30 which falls in the first month of June 
which occurs twenty-four months after the end of such fiscal 
year or years; and 

"(B) for the period commencing on July 1, 1976, and ending 
on September 30, 1976, and for any fiscal year commencing on or 
after October 1, 1976, on September 30 of the second fiscal year 
following that period or the fiscal year or years, as the case may 
be, for which the appropriation is available for obligation. 

 "(£) The withdrawals required by subsection (a) (2) of this section 
shall be made— 

"(A) for any fiscal year ending on or before June 30, 1976, not 
later than September 30 of the fiscal year immediately following 
the fiscal year in which the period of availability for obligation 
expires; and 

"(B) for the period commencing on July 1, 1976, and ending 
on September 30, 1976, and for any fiscal year commencing on or 
after October 1, 1976, not later than November 15 following such 
period or fiscal year, as the case may be, in which the period of 
availability for obligation expires." 

CONVERSION 01' AUTHORIZATIONS 01' APPROPRIATIONS 

 gj,^. gQ^ ji^^y |^^ providing for an authorization of appropriations 
commencing on July 1 of a year shall, if that year is any year after 
1975, be considered as meaning October 1 of that year. Any law providing 
for an authorization of appropriations ending on June 30 of a 
year shall, if that year is any year after 1976, be considered as meaning 
September '30 of that year. Any law providing for an authorization of 
appropriations for the fiscal year 1977 or any fiscal year thereafter 
shall be construed as referring to that fiscal year ending on September 
30 of the calendar year having the same calendar year number as 
the fiscal year number. 

REPEALS 

SEC. 505. The following provisions of law are repealed: 

(1) the ninth paragraph under the headings "Legislative Establishment", 
"Senate", of the Deficiency Appropriation Act, fiscal 
year 1934 (48 Stat. 1022; 2 U.S.C. 66) ; and 
(2) the proviso to the second paragraph under the headings 
"House of Representatives", "Salaries, Mileage, and Expenses of 
Members", of the Legislative-Judiciary Appropriation Act, 1955 
(68 Stat. 400; 2 U.S.C. 81). 
TECHNICAL AMENDMENT 

SEC. 506. (a) Section 105 of title 1, United States Code, is amended 
by striking out "June 30" and inserting in lieu thereof "September 30". 

 (^) The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be effective 
with respect to Acts making appropriations for the support of the 
Government for any fiscal year commencing on or after October 1,1976. 


88 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 

TITLE VI—AMENDMENTS TO BUDGET AND 
ACCOUNTING ACT, 1921 

MATTERS TO BE INCLUDED IN PRESIDENT'S BUDGET 

SEC. 601. Section 201 of the Budget and Accounting Act, 1921 (31 

U.S.C. 11), is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new 
subsections: 
"(d) The Budget transmitted pursuant to subsection (a) for each 
fiscal year shall set forth separately the items enumerated in section 
301(a) (l)-(5) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974. ^"'^' P- 306. 

"(e) The Budget transmitted pursuant to subsection (a) for each 
fiscal year shall set forth the levels of tax expenditures under existing 
law for such fiscal year (the tax expenditure budget), taking into 
account projected economic factors, and any changes in such existing 
levels based on proposals contained in such Budget, For purposes of 
this subsection, the terms 'tax expenditures' and 'tax expenditures 
budget' have the meanings given to them by section 3(a)(3) of the 
Congressional Budget Act of 1974. ^"'e- P. 299. 

"(f) The Budget transmitted pursuant to subsection (a) for each 
fiscal year shall contain— 

"(1) a comparison, for the last completed fiscal year, of the 
total amount of outlays estimated in the Budget transmitted pursuant 
to subsection (a) for each major program involving uncontrollable 
or relatively uncontrollable outlays and the total amount 
of outlays made under each such major program during such 
fiscal year; 

"(2) a comparison, for the last completed fiscal year, of the 
total amount of revenues estimated in the Budget transmitted 
pursuant to subsection (a) and the total amount of revenues 
received during such year, and, with respect to each major revenue 
source, the amount of revenues estimated in the Budget transmitted 
pursuant to subsection (a) and the amount of revenues 
received during such year; and 

" (3) an analysis and explanation of the difference between each 
amount set forth pursuant to paragraphs (1) and (2) as the 
amount of outlays or revenues estimated in the Budget submitted 
under subsection (a) for such fiscal year and the corresponding 
amount set forth as the amount of outlays made or revenues 
received during such fiscal year. 

"(g) The President shall transmit to the Congress, on or before ^Zlem^nt^^^tTlns-. 
April 10 and July 15 of each year, a statement of all amendments to or mittai to con-
revisions in the budget authority requested, the estimated outlays, and g'-ess. 
the estimated receipts for the ensuing fiscal year set forth in the 
Budget transmitted pursuant to subsection (a) (including any previous 
amendments or revisions proposed on behalf of the executive 
branch) that he deems necessary and appropriate based on the most 
current information available. Such statement shall contain the effect 
of such amendments and revisions on the summary data submitted 
under subsection (a) and shall include such supporting detail as is 
practicable. The statement transmitted on or before July 15 of any 
year may be included in the supplemental summary required to be 
transmitted under subsection (b) during such year. The Budget transmitted 
to the Congress pursuant to subsection (a) for any fiscal year, 
or the supporting detail transmitted in connection therewith, shall 
include a statement of all such amendments and revisions with respect 
to the fiscal year in progress made before the date of transmission of 
such Budget. 


324 PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT. 

"(h) The Budget transmitted pursuant to subsection (a) for each 
fiscal year shall include information with respect to estimates of appropriations 
for the next succeeding fiscal year for grants, contracts, or 
other payments under any program for which there is an authorization 
of appropriations for such succeeding fiscal year and such appropriations 
are authorized to be included in an appropriation Act for 
the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year in which the appropriation is 
to be available for obligation. 

"(i) The Budget transmitted pursuant to subsection (a) for each 
fiscal year, beginning with the fiscal year ending September 30, 1979, 
shall contain a presentation of budget authority, proposed budget 
authority, outlays, proposed outlays, and descriptive information in 
terms of— 

"(1) a detailed structure of national needs which shall be used 
to reference all agency missions and programs; 
"(2) agency missions; and 

•'(3) basic programs. 
To the extent practicable, each agency shall furnish information in 
support of its budget requests in accordance with its assigned missions 
in terms of Federal functions and subfunctions, including mission 
responsibilities of component organizations, and shall relate its 
programs to agency missions." 
MIDYEAR KEVIEW 

SEC. 602. Section 201 of the Budget and Accounting Act, 1921 (31 

U.S.C. 11), is amended by striking out "on or before June 1 of each 
year, beginning with 1972" and inserting in lieu thereof "on or before 
July 15 of each year". 
riVE-YEAR BUDGET PROJECTIONS 

SEC. 603. Section 201(a) of the Budget and Accounting Act, 1921 
(31 U.S.C. 11), is amended— 

(1) by inserting after "ensuing fiscal year" in paragraph (5) 
"and projections for the four fiscal years immediately following 
the ensuing fiscal year"; 
(2) by striking out "such year" in paragraph (5) and inserting 
in lieu thereof "such years"; and 
(3) by inserting after "ensuing fiscal year" in paragraph (6) 
"and projections for the four fiscal years immediately following 
the ensuing fiscal year". 
ALLOWANCES FOR SUPPLEMENTAL BUDGET AUTHORITY AND 
UNCONTROLLABLE OUTLAYS 

SEC. 604. Section 201(a) of the Budget and Accounting Act, 1921 
(31 U.S.C. 11), is further amended— 

(1) by striking out "and" at the end of paragraph (11); 
(2) by striking out the period at the end of paragraph (12) 
and inserting in lieu thereof "; and"; and 
! (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: 
1 "(13) an allowance for additional estimated expenditures and 
'•' proposed appropriations for the ensuing fiscal year, and an allow


ance for unanticipated uncontrollable expenditures for the 
ensuing fiscal year." 


88 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 

BUDGET DATA BASED ON CONTINUATION OF EXISTING LEVEL OF SERVICES 

SEC. 605. (a) On or before November 10 of each year (beginning 
with 1975), the President shall submit to the Senate and the House of 
Representatives the estimated outlays and proposed budget authority 
which would be included in the Budget to be submitted pursuant to 
section 201 of the Budget and Accounting Act, 1921, for the ensuing 
fiscal year if all programs and activities were carried on during such 
ensuing fiscal year at the same level as the fiscal year in progress and 
without policy changes in such programs and activities. The estimated 
outlays and proposed budget authority submitted pursuant to this 
section shall be shown by function and sub functions (in accordance 
with the classifications in the budget summary table entitled "Budget 
Authority and Outlays by Function and Agency"), by major programs 
within each such function, and by agency. Accompanying these estimates 
shall be the economic and programmatic assumptions underlying 
the estimated outlays and proposed budget authority, such as the rate 
of inflation, the rate of real economic growth, the unemployment rate, 
program caseloads, and pay increases. 

(b) The Joint Economic Committee shall review the estimated outlays 
and proposed budget authority so submitted, and shall submit to 
the Committees on the Budget of both Houses an economic evaluation 
thereof on or before December 31 of each year. 
STUDY OF OFF-BUDGET AGENCIES 

SEC. 606. The Committees on the Budget of the House of Representatives 
and the Senate shall study on a continuing basis those provisions 
of law which exempt agencies of the Federal Government, or 
any of their activities or outlays, from inclusion in the Budget of the 
United States Government transmitted by the President under section 
201 of the Budget and Accounting Act, 1921. Each committee shall, 
from time to time, report to its House its recommendations for terminating 
or modifying such provisions. 

TEAR-AHEAD REQUESTS FOR AUTHORIZATION OF NEW BUDGET AUTHORITY 

SEC. 607. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any request 
for the enactment of legislation authorizing the enactment of new 
budget authority to continue a program or activity for a fiscal year 
(beginning with the fiscal year commencing October 1, 1976) shall be 
submitted to the Congress not later than May 15 of the year preceding 
the year in which such fiscal year begins. In the case of a request for 
the enactment of legislation authorizing the enactment of new budget 
authority for a new program or activity which is to continue for more 
than one fiscal year, such request shall be submitted for at least the first 
2 fiscal years. 

TITLE VII—PROGRAM REVIEW AND EVALUATION 

REVIEW AND EVALUATION BY STANDING COMMITTEES 

SEC. 701. Section 136(a) of the Legislative Reorganization Act of 
1946 (2 U.S.C. 190d) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following 
new sentences: "Such committees may carry out the required 
analysis, appraisal, and evaluation themselves, or by contract, or may 
require a Government agency to do so and furnish a report thereon to 
the Congress. Such committees may rely on such techniques as pilot 
testing, analysis of costs in comparison with benefits, or provision for 
evaluation after a defined period of time." 

Estimated outlays 
and proposed 
budget authority; 
submittal to Congress 
by President. 


31 use 11a. 

Ante, p. 324. 

Evaluation, 
submittal to 
Budget Committees. 


31 use lib. 

Periodic reports 
to Congres 

31 use lie. 

Report to 
'ongress. 


326 PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT. 

REVIEW AND EVALUATION BY THE COMPTROLLER GENERAL 

SEC. 702. (a) Section 204 of the Legislative Reorganization Act of 
1970 (31 U.S.C. 1154) is amended to read as follows: 

"REVIEW AND EVALUATION 

"SEC. 204. (a) The Comptroller General shall review and evaluate 
the results of Government programs and activities carried on under 
existing law when ordered by either House of Congress, or upon his 
own initiative, or when requested by any committee of the House of 
Representatives or the Senate, or any joint committee of the two 
Houses, having jurisdiction over such programs and activities. 

"(b) The Comptroller General, upon request of any committee of 
either House or any joint committee of the two Houses, shall— 

"(1) assist such committee or joint committee in developing a 
statement of legislative objectives and goals and methods for 
assessing and reporting actual program performance in relation to 
such legislative objectives and goals. Such statements shall include, 
but are not limited to, recommendations as to methods of assessment, 
information to be reported, responsibility for reporting, 
frequency of reports, and feasibility of pilot testing; and 

" (2) assist such committee or joint committee in analyzing and 
assessing program reviews or evaluation studies prepared by and 
for any Federal agency. 

Copies. Upon request of any Member of either House, the Comptroller General 
shall furnish to such Member a copy of any statement or other 
material compiled in carrying out paragraphs (1) and (2) which has 
been released by the committee or joint committee for which it was 
compiled. 

" (c) The Comptroller General shall develop and recommend to the 
Congress methods for review and evaluation of Government programs 
and activities carried on under existing law. 

gra^RevliwTnd "(<!) ^^ Carrying out his responsibilities under this section, the 

Evaluation. Comptroller General is authorized to establish an Office of Program 
Establishment. Review aud Evaluation within the General Accounting Office. The 
Comptroller General is authorized to employ not to exceed ten experts 
on a permanent, temporary, or intermittent basis and to obtain services 
as authorized by section 3109 of title 5, United States Code, but in 
either case at a rate (or the daily equivalent) for individuals not to 
exceed that prescribed, from time to time, for level V of the Executive 
Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code. 

"(e) The Comptroller General shall include in his annual report to 
the Congress a review of his activities under this section, including his 
recommendations of methods for review and evaluation of Government 
programs and activities under subsection (c)." 

(b) Item 204 in the table of contents of such Act is amended to read 
as follows: 
"Sec. 204. Review and evaluation." 

CONTINUING STUDY OF ADDITIONAL BUDGET REFORM PROPOSALS 

31 use 1303. 

SEC. 703. (a) The Committees on the Budget of the House of Representatives 
and the Senate shall study on a continuing basis proposals 
designed to improve and facilitate methods of congressional budget-
making. The proposals to be studied shall include, but are not limited 
to, proposals for— 


88 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 

(1) improving the information base required for determining 
the effectiveness of new programs by such means as pilot testing, 
survey research, and other experimental and analytical 
techniques; 
(2) improving analytical and systematic evaluation of the 
effectivness of existing programs; 
(3) establishing maximum and minimum time limitations for 
program authorization; and 
(4) developing techniques of human resource accounting and 
other means of providing noneconomic as well as economic 
evaluation measures. 
(b) The Committee on the Budget of each House shall, from time 
to time, report to its House the results of the study carried on by it 
under subsection (a), together with its recommendations. 
(c) Nothing in this section shall preclude studies to improve the 
budgetary process by any other committee of the House of Representatives 
or the Senate or any joint committee of the Congress. 
TITLE VIII—FISCAL AND BUDGETARY INFORMATION 
AND CONTROLS 

AMENDMENT TO LEGISLATIVE REORGANIZATION ACT OF 197 0 

SEC. 801. (a) So much of title II of the Legislative Reorganization 
Act of 1970 (31 U.'S.C. chapter 22) as precedes section 204 thereof 
is amended to read as follows: 

"TITLE II—FISCAL AND BUDGETARY INFORMATION 
AND CONTROLS 

"PART 1-—FISCAL, BUDGETARY, AND PROGRAM-RELATED DATA AND 
INFORMATION 

"FEDERA L FISCAL, BUDGETARY, AND PROGRAM-RELATED DATA AND 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS 

"SEC. 201. The Secretary of the Treasury and the Director of the 
Office of Management and Budget, in cooperation with the Comptroller 
General of the United States, shall develop, establish, and maintain, 
for use by all Federal agencies, standardized data processing and 
information systems for fiscal, budgetary, and program-related data 
and information. The development, establishment, and maintenance 
of such systems shall be carried out so as to meet the needs of the 
various branches of the Federal Government and, insofar as practicable, 
of governments at the State and local level. 

"STANDARDIZATION OF TERMINOLOGY, DEFINITIONS, CLASSIFICATIONS, AND 

CODES FOR FISCAL, BUDGETARY, AND PROGRAM-RELATED DATA AND INFOR


MATION 

"SEC. 202. (a) (1) The Comptroller General of the United States, in 
cooperation with the Secretary of the Treasury, the Director of the 
Office of Management and Budget, and the Director of the Congressional 
Budget Office, shall develop, establish, maintain, and publish 
standard terminology, definitions, classifications, and codes for 
Federal fiscal, budgetary, and program-related data and information. 
The authority contained in this section shall include, but not be limited 
to, data and information pertaining to Federal fiscal policy, revenues, 

Periodic reports 
to Congress. 

 3i use iisi. 

 ^i use iisa. 


328 PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT. 

Report to 
Congress. 

Additional reports 
to Congress; 
legislation 
recommendations. 

Report to 
Congress. 

Report to 
Congress. 

31 use 1153. 

receipts, expenditures, functions, programs, projects, and activities. 
Such standard terms, definitions, classifications, and codes shall be 
used by all Federal agencies in supplying to the Congress fiscal, 
budgetary, and program-related data and information. 

"(2) The Comptroller General shall submit to the Congress, on or 
before June 30,1975, a report containing the initial standard terminology, 
definitions, classifications, and codes referred to in paragraph (1), 
and shall recommend any legislation necessary to implement them. 
After June 30, 1975, the Comptroller General shall submit to the Congress 
additional reports as he may think advisable, including any 
recommendations for any legislation he may deem necessary to further 
the development, establishment, and maintenance, modification, and 
executive implementation of such standard terminology, definitions, 
classifications, and codes. 

"(b) In carrying out this responsibility, the Comptroller General 
of the United States shall give particular consideration to the needs of 
the Committees on the Budget of the House and Senate, the Committees 
on Appropriations of the House and Senate, the Committee on 
Ways and Means of the House, the Committee on Finance of the 
Senate, and the Congressional Budget Office. 

"(c) The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a 
continuing program to identify and specify the needs of the committees 
and Members of the Congress for fiscal, budgetary, and program-
related information to support the objectives of this part. 

"(d) The Comptroller General shall assist committees in developing 
their information needs, including such needs expressed in legislative 
requirements, and shall monitor the various recurring reporting 
requirements of the Congress and committees and make recommendations 
to the Congress and committees for changes and improvements 
in their reporting requirements to meet congressional information 
needs ascertained by the Comptroller General, to enhance their usefulness 
to the congressional users and to eliminate duplicative or 
unneeded reporting. 

"(e) On or before September 1, 1974, and each year thereafter, the 
Comptroller General shall report to the Congress on needs identified 
and specified under subsection (c); the relationship of these needs to 
the existing reporting requirements; the extent to which the executive 
branch reporting presently meets the identified needs; the specification 
of changes to standard classifications needed to meet congressional 
needs; the activities, progress and results of his activities under subsection 
(d) ; and the progress that the executive branch has made 
during the past year. 

"(f) On or before March 1, 1975, and each year thereafter, the 
Director of the Office of Management and Budget and the Secretary 
of the Treasury shall report to the Congress on their plans for addressing 
the needs identified and specified under subsection (c), including 
plans for implementing changes to classifications and codes to meet 
the information needs of the Congress as well as the status of prior 
year system and classification implementations. 

"AVAILABILITY TO AND USE BY THE CONGRESS AND STATE AND LOCAL GOV


ERNMENTS OF FEDERAL FISCAL, BUDGETARY, AND PROGRAM-RELATED DATA 

AND INFORMATION 

"SEC. 203. (a) Upon request of any committee of either House, of 
any joint committee of the two Houses, of the Comptroller General, 
or of the Director of the Congressional Budget Office, the Secretary of 
the Treasury, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, 
and the heads of the various executive agencies shall— 


88 STAT.] PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 

''(1) furnish to such committee or joint committee, the Comptroller 
General, or the Director of the Congressional Budget Office 
information as to the location and nature of available fiscal, 
budgetary, and program-related data and information; 

•'(2) to the extent practicable, prepare summary tables of such 
data and information and any related information deemed necessary 
by such committee or joint committee, the Comptroller General, 
or the Director of the Congressional Budget Office; and 
"(3) furnish to such committee or joint committee, the Comptroller 
General, or the Director of the Congressional Budget Office 
any program evaluations conducted or commissioned by any 
executive agency. 

"(b) The Comptroller General, in cooperation with the Director 
of the Congressional Budget Office, the Secretary of the Treasury, and 
the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, shall— 

•'(1) develop, establish, and maintain an up-to-date inventory 
and directory of sources and information systems containing fiscal, 
budgetary, and program-related data and information and a 
brief description of their content; 
" (2) provide, upon request, assistance to committees, joint committees, 
and ^Members of Congress in securing Federal fiscal, 
budgetary, and program-related data and information from the 
sources identified in such inventory and directory; and 

"(3) furnish, upon request, assistance to committees and joint 
committees of Congress and, to the extent practicable, to Members 
of Congress in appraising and analyzing fiscal, budgetary, and 
program-related data and information secured from the sources 
identified in such inventory and directory, 

''(c) The Comptroller General and the Director of the Congres- central data 
sional Budget Office shall, to the extent they deem necessary, develop, mem! ^^^ °^' 
establish, and maintain a central file or files of the data and information 
required to carry out the purposes of this title. Such a file or 
files shall be established to meet recurring requirements of the Congress 
for fiscal, budgetary, and program-related data and information 
and shall include, but not be limited to, data and information pertaining 
to budget requests, congressional authorizations to obligate and 
spend, apportionment and reserve actions, and obligations and expenditures. 
Such file or files and their indexes shall be maintained in such a 
manner as to facilitate their use by the committees of both Houses, 
joint committees, and other congressional agencies through modern 
data processing and communications techniques. 

"(d) The Director of the Office of Management and Budget, in sti"e°and'iocai° 
cooperation with the Director of the Congressional Budget Office, governments. 
the Comptroller General, and appropriate representatives of State 
and local governments, shall provide, to the extent practicable. State 
and local governments such fiscal, budgetary, and program-related 
data and information as may be necessary for the accurate and timely 
determination by these governments of the impact of Federal 
assistance upon their budgets." 

(b) The table of contents of the Legislative Reorganization Act 
of 1970 is amended by striking out— 
"TITLE II—FISCAL CONTROLS 

'•PAKT 1—BUDGETARY AND FISCAL INFORMATION AND DATA 

"Sec. 201. Budgetary and fiscal data processing system. 
"Sec. 202. Budget standard classifications. 
"Sec. 203. Availability to Congress of budgetary, fiscal, and related data." 

and inserting in lieu thereof— 


31 use lid. 
Ante, p. 324. 

Ante, p. 299. 

 PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT. 

"TITLE II—FISCAL AND BUDGETARY INFORMATION AND CONTROLS 

"PAKT 1—^FISCAL, BUDGETAEY, AND PROGRAM-RELATED DATA AND INFORMATION 

"Sec. 201. Federal fiscal, budgetary, and program-related data and information 

systems. 

"Sec. 202. Standardization of terminology, definitions, classifications, and codes 

for fiscal, budgetary, and program-related data and information. 

"Sec. 203. Availability to and use by the Congress and State and local govern


ments of Federal fiscal, budgetary, and program-related data and 

information." 

CHANGES IN FUNCTIONAL CATEGORIES 

SEC. 802. Any change in the functional categories set forth in the 
Budget of the United States Government transmitted pursuant to 
section 201 of the Budget and Accounting Act, 1921, shall be made 
only in consultation with the Committees on Appropriations and the 
Budget of the House of Representatives and Senate. 

TITLE IX—MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS; EFFECTIVE 
DATES 

AMENDMENTS TO RULES OF THE HOUSE 

SEC. 901. (a) Rule XI of the Rules of the House of Representatives 
^^g amended by section 101(c) of this Act) is amended by inserting 
immediately after clause 22 the following new clause: 
"22A. The respective areas of legislative jurisdiction under this rule 
are modified by title I of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974." 

(b) Paragraph (c) of clause 29 of Rule XI of the Rules of the 
House of Representatives (as redesignated by section 101(c) of this 
Act) is amended by inserting "the Committee on the Budget," immediately 
after "the Committee on Appropriations,". 
(c) Subparagraph (6) of paragraph (a) of clause 30 of Rule XI 
of the Rules of the House of Representatives (as so redesignated) is 
amended by inserting "and the Committee on the Budget" immediately 
before the period at the end thereof. 
(d) Subparagraph (4) of paragraph (b) of clause 30 of Rule XI 
of the Rules of the House of Representatives (as so redesignated) is 
amended by inserting "and the Committee on the Budget" immediately 
before the period at the end hereof. 
(e) Paragraph (d) of clause 30 of Rule XI of the Rules of the 
House of Representatives (as so redesignated) is amended by striking 
out "the Committee on Appropriations may appoint" and inserting in 
lieu thereof "the Committee on Appropriations and the Committee on 
the Budget may each appoint". 
(f) Clause 32 of Rule XI of the Rules of the House of Representatives 
(as so redesignated) is amended by inserting "the Committee on 
the Budget," immediately after "the Committee on Appropriations,". 
(g) Paragraph (a) of clause 33 of Rule XI of the Rules of the 
House of Representatives (as so redesignated) is amended by inserting 
"and the Committee on the Budget" immediately after "the Committee 
on Appropriations". 
CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO STANDING RULES OF THE SENATE 

SEC. 902. Paragraph 1 of rule XXV of the Standing Rules of the 
Senate is amended— 

(1) by striking out "Revenue" in subparagraph (h)l and 
inserting in lieu thereof "Except as provided in the Congressional 
Budget Act of 1974, revenue"; 

88 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 

(2) by striking out "The" in subparagraph (h)2 and inserting 
in lieu thereof "Except as provided in the Congressional Budget 
Actof 1974, the"; and 
(3) by striking out "Budget" in subparagraph (j) (1) (A) and 
inserting in lieu thereof "Except as provided in the Congressional 
Budget Act of 1974, budget". 
AMENDMENTS TO LEGISLATIVE REORGANIZATION ACT OF 1946 

SEC. 903. (a) Section 134(c) of the Legislative Keorganization Act 
of 1946 (2 U.S.C. 190b (b)) is amended by inserting "or the Committee 
on the Budget" after "Appropriations". 

(b) Section 136(c) of such Act (2 U.S.C. 190d(c)) is amended by 
striking out "Committee on Appropriations of the Senate and the 
Committees on Appropriations," and inserting in lieu thereof "Committees 
on Appropriations and the Budget of the Senate and the 
Committees on Appropriations, the Budget,". 
EXERCISE OF RULEMAKING POWERS 

SEC. 904. (a) The provisions of this title (except section 905) and of _3i use uoi 

note. 

titles I, III, and IV and the provisions of sections 606, 701, 703, and 

1017 are enacted by the Congress— 

(1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the House of 
Eepresentatives and the Senate, respectively, and as such they 
shall be considered as part of the rules of each House, respectively, 
or of that House to which they specifically apply, and such rules 
shall supersede other rules only to the extent that they are inconsistent 
therewith; and 
(2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either 
House to change such rules (so far as relating to such House) at 
any time, in the same manner, and to the same extent as in the 
case of any other rule of such House. 
Waiver. 

(b) Any provision of title III or IV may be waived or suspended 
Ante, pp. 30(5, 

in the Senate by a majority vote of the Members voting, a quorum 31"^ 
being present, or by the unanimous consent of the Senate. 

Appeals. 

(c) Appeals in the Senate from the decisions of the Chair relating 
to any provision of title III or IV or section 1017 shall, except as otherwise 
provided therein, be limited to 1 hour, to be equally divided 
between, and controlled by, the mover and the manager of the resolution, 
concurrent resolution, reconciliation bill, or rescission bill, as the 
case may be. 
EFFECTIVE DATES 

31 use 1301 

SEC. 905. (a) Except as provided in this section, the provisions of 

note. 

this Act shall take effect on the date of its enactment, 

(b) Title II (except section 201 (a)), section 403, and section 502(c) 
shall take effect on the day on which the first Director of the Congressional 
Budget Office is appointed under section 201 (a). 
(c) Except as provided in section 906, title III and section 402 shall 
apply with respect to the fiscal year beginning on October 1,1976, and 
succeeding fiscal years, and section 401 shall take effect on the first day 
of the second regular session of the Ninety-fourth Congress. 
(d) The amendments to the Budget and Accounting Act, 1921, made ^^„/^^^ ^ 
Ante, p. 323. 

by sections 601, 603, and 604 shall apply with respect to the fiscal year 
beginning on July 1, 1975, and succeeding fiscal years, except that section 
201(g) of such Act (as added by section 601) shall apply with 
respect to the fiscal year beginning on October 1, 1976, and succeeding 
fiscal years and section 201 (i) of such Act (as added by section 601) 


PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT. 

31 use 1322 
note. 

Ante, pp. 306, 
317. 

Ante, p. 304. 

Impoundment 
Control Act of 
1974. 

31 use 1400. 

Contingency or 
savings reserves, 
establishment. 

31 use 581C.1. 

shall apply with respect to the fiscal year beginning on October 1,1978, 
and succeeding fiscal years. The amendment to such Act made by section 
602 shall apply with respect to the fiscal year beginning on October 
1,1976, and succeeding fiscal years. 

APPLICATION OF CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET PROCESS TO FISCAL YEAR 19 76 

SEC. 906. If the Committees on the Budget of the House of Eepresentatives 
and the Senate both agree that it is feasible to report and 
act on a concurrent resolution on the budget referred to in section 301 
(a), or to apply any provision of title III or section 401 or 402, for the 
fiscal year beginning on July 1,1975, and submit reports of such agreement 
to their respective Houses, then to the extent and in the manner 
specified in such reports, the provisions so specified and section 202(f) 
shall apply with respect to such fiscal year. If any provision so specified 
contains a date, such reports shall also specify a substitute date. 

TITLE X—IMPOUNDMENT CONTKOL 

PART A—GENERAL PROVISIONS 

DISCLAIMER 

SEC. 1001. Nothing contained in this Act, or in any amendments made 
by this Act, shall be construed as— 

(1) asserting or conceding the constitutional powers or limitations 
of either the Congress or the President; 
(2) ratifying or approving any impoundment heretofore or 
hereafter executed or approved by the President or any other 
Federal officer or employee, except insofar as pursuant to statutory 
authorization then in effect; 
(3) affecting in any way the claims or defenses of any party to 
litigation concerning any impoundment; or 
(4)superseding any provision of law which requires the obligation 
of budget authority or the making of outlays thereunder. 
AMENDMENT TO ANTIDEFICIENCY ACT 

SEC. 1002. Section '3679(c) (2) of the Revised Statutes, as amended 
(31 U.S.C. 665), is amended to read as follows: 

"(2) In apportioning any appropriation, reserves may be established 
solely to provide for contingencies, or to effect savings whenever 
savings are made possible by or through changes in requirements or 
greater efficiency of operations. Whenever it is determined by an officer 
designated in subsection (d) of this section to make apportionments 
and reapportionments that any amount so reserved will not be required 
to carry out the full objectives and scope of the appropriation concerned, 
he shall recommend the rescission of such amount in the manner 
provided in the Budget and Accounting Act, 1921, for estimates 
of appropriations. Except as specifically provided by particular appropriations 
Acts or other laws, no reserves shall be established other than 
as authorized by this subsection. Reserves established pursuant to this 
subsection shall be reported to the Congress in accordance with the 
Impoundment Control Act of 1974." 

REPEAL OF EXISTING IMPOUNDMENT REPORTING PROVISION 

SEC. 1003. Section 203 of the Budget and Accounting Procedures Act 

 of 1950 is repealed. 


88 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 333 

PART B—CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED EESCISSIONS, 
EESERVATIONS, AND DEFERRALS OF BUDGET AUTHORITY 
DEFINITIONS 

SEC. 1011. For purposes of this part— 

(1) "deferral of budget authority" includes— 
(A) withholding or delaying the obligation or expenditure 
of budget authority (whether by establishing reserves or 
otherwise) provided for projects or activities; or 
(B) any other type of Executive action or inaction which 
effectively precludes the obligation or expenditure of budget 
authority, including authority to obligate by contract in 
advance of appropriations as specifically authorized by law; 
(2) "Comptroller General" means the Comptroller General of 
the United States; 
(3) "rescission bill" means a bill or joint resolution which only 
rescinds, in whole or in part, budget authority proposed to be 
rescinded in a special message transmitted by the President under 
section 1012, and upon which the Congress completes action before 
the end of the first period of 45 calendar days of continuous 
session of the Congress after the date on which the President's 
message is received by the Congress; 
(4) "impoundment resolution" means a resolution of the House 
of Eepresentatives or the Senate which only expresses its disapproval 
of a proposed deferral of budget authority set forth in a 
special message transmitted by the President under section 1013; 
and 
(5) continuity of a session of the Congress shall be considered 
as broken only by an adjournment of the Congress sine die, and 
the days on which either House is not in session because of an 
adjournment of more than 3 days to a day certain shall be excluded 
in the computation of the 45-day period referred to in paragraph 
(3) of this section and in section 1012, and the 25-day 
periods referred to in sections 1016 and 1017(b) (1). If a special 
message is transmitted under section 1012 during any Congress 
and the last session of such Congress adjourns sine die before 
the expiration of 45 calendar days of continuous session (or a 
special message is so transmitted after the last session of the 
Congress adjourns sine die), the message shall be deemed to have 
been retransmitted on the first day of the succeeding Congress 
and the 45-day period referred to in paragraph (3) of this section 
and in section 1012 (with respect to such message) shall commence 
on the day after such first day. 
RESCISSION OF BUDGET AUTHORITY 

SEC. 1012. (a) TRANSMITTAL OF SPECIAL MESSAGE.—Whenever the 
President determines that all or part of any budget authority will not 
be required to carry out the full objectives or scope of programs for 
which it is provided or that such budget authority should be rescinded 
for fiscal policy or other reasons (including the termination of authorized 
projects or activities for which budget authority has been provided), 
or whenever all or part of budget authority provided for only 
one fiscal year is to be reserved from obligation for such fiscal year, 
the President shall transmit to both Houses of Congress a special message 
specifying— 

31 use 1401, 

Congressional 
session continuity. 


31 use 1402. 


334 PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT. 

(1) the amount of budget authority which he proposes to be 
rescinded or which is to be so reserved; 
(2) any account, department, or establishment of the Government 
to which such budget authority is available for obligation, 
and the specific project or governmental functions involved; 
(3) the reasons why the budget authority should be rescinded 
or is to be so reserved; 
(4) to the maximum extent practicable, the estimated fiscal, 
economic, and budgetary effect of the proposed rescission or of the 
reservation; and 
(5) all facts, circumstances, and considerations relating to or 
bearing upon the proposed rescission or the reservation and the 
decision to effect the proposed rescission or the reservation, and to 
the maximum extent practicable, the estimated effect of the proposed 
rescission or the reservation upon the objects, purposes, and 
programs for which the budget authority is provided. 
(b) REQUIREMENT TO MAKE AVAILABLE FOR OBLIGATION.—^Any 
amount of budget authority proposed to be rescinded or that is to be 
reserved as set forth in such special message shall be made available for 
obligation unless, within the prescribed 4:5-day period, the Congress 
has completed action on a rescission bill rescinding all or part of the 
amount proposed to be rescinded or that is to be reserved. 
DISAPPROVAL OF PROPOSED DEFERRALS OF BUDGET AUTHORITY 

31 use 1403. gj,^ 1013. (a) TRANSMITTAL OF SPECIAL MESSAGE.—^Whenever the 
President, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, the 
head of any department or agency of the United States, or any officer 
or employee of the United States proposes to defer any budget authority 
provided for a specific purpose or project, the President shall 
transmit to the House of Representatives and the Senate a special message 
specifying— 

(1) the amount of the budget authority proposed to be 
deferred; 
(2) any account, department, or establishment of the Government 
to which such budget authority is available for obligation, 
and the specific projects or governmental functions involved; 
(3) the period of time during which the budget authority is 
proposed to be deferred; 
(4) the reasons for the proposed deferral, including any legal 
authority invoked by him to justify the proposed deferral; 
(5) to the maximum extent practicable, the estimated fiscal, 
economic, and budgetary effect of the proposed deferral; and 
(6) all facts, circumstances, and considerations relating to or 
bearing upon the proposed deferral and the decision to effect the 
proposed deferral, including an analysis of such facts, circumstances, 
and considerations in terms of their application to any 
legal authority and specific elements of legal authority invoked 
by him to justify such proposed deferral, and to the maximum 
extent practicable, the estimated effect of the proposed deferral 
upon the objects, purposes, and programs for which the budget 
authority is provided. 
A special message may include one or more proposed deferrals of 

Time limitation, budget authority. A deferral may not be proposed for any period of 
time extending beyond the end of the fiscal year in which the special 
message proposing the deferral is transmitted to the House and the 
Senate. 


88 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 

(b) REQUIREMENT TO MAKE AVAILABLE FOR OBLIGATION.—Any 
amount of budget authority proposed to be deferred, as set forth in a 
special message transmitted under subsection (a), shall be made available 
for obligation if either House of Congress passes an impoundment 
resolution disapproving such proposed deferral. 
(c) EXCEPTION.—^^The provisions of this section do not apply to any 
budget authority proposed to be rescinded or that is to be reserved as 
set forth in a special message required to be transmitted under section 
1012. 
TRANSMISSION OF MESSAGES; PUBLICATION 

SEC. 1014. (a) DELIVERY TO HOUSE AND SENATE.—Each special message 
transmitted under section 1012 or 1013 shall be transmitted to the 
House of Representatives and the Senate on the same day, and shall 
be delivered to the Clerk of the House of Representatives if the House 
is not in session, and to the Secretary of the Senate if the Senate is 
not in session. Each special message so transmitted shall be referred to 
the appropriate committee of the House of Representatives and the 
Senate. Each such message shall be printed as a document of each 
Ij-^ ^ 
JtlOUSe. 

'(b) DELIVERY TO COMPTROLLER GENERAL.—A copy of each special 
message transmitted under section 1012 or 1013 shall be transmitted to 
the Comptroller General on the same day it is transmitted to the House 
of Representatives and the Senate. In order to assist the Congress in 
the exercise of its functions under sections 1012 and 1013, the Comptroller 
General shall review each such message and inform the House 
of Representatives and the Senate as promptly as practicable with 
I'espect to— 

(1) in the case of a special message transmitted under section 
1012, the facts surrounding the proposed rescission or the reservation 
of budget authority (including the probable effects thereof); 
and 
(2) in the case of a special message transmitted under section 
1013, (A) the facts surrounding each proposed deferral of budget 
authority (including the probable effects thereof) and (B) 
whether or not (or to what extent), in his judgment, such proposed 
deferral is in accordance with existing statutory authority. 
(c) TRANSMISSION or SUPPLEMENTARY MESSAGES.—If any information 
contained in a special message transmitted under section 1012 or 
1013 is subsequently revised, the President shall transmit to both 
Houses of Congress and the Comptroller General a supplementary 
message stating and explaining such revision. Any such supplementary 
message shall be delivered, referred, and printed as provided in 
subsection (a). The Comptroller General shall promptly notify the 
House of Representatives and the Senate of any changes in the information 
submitted by him under subsection (b) which may be necessitated 
by such revision. 
(d) PRINTING IN FEDERAL REGISTER.—Any special message transmitted 
under section 1012 or 1013, and any supplementary message 
transmitted under subsection (c), shaU be printed in the first issue 
of the Federal Register published after such transmittal. 
(e) CUMULATIVE REPORTS or PROPOSED RESCISSIONS, RESERVATIONS, 
AND DEFERRALS OF BUDGET AUTHORITY.— 
(1) The President shall submit a report to the House of Representatives 
and the Senate, not later than the 10th day of each 
month during a fiscal year, listing all budget authority for that 
fiscal year with respect to which, as of the first day of such 
month— 
31 use 1404. 

„ Printing as 
House or Senate 
document. 

 copy. 

 Review. 

 Notification of 

Congress, 


PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT. 

Publication in 
Federal Register. 

31 use 1405. 

Report to 
Congress. 

Report to 
Congress. 

31 use 1406. 

Precedence. 

(A) he has transmitted a special message under section 
1012 with respect to a proposed rescission or a reservation; 
and 
(B) he has transmitted a special message under section 
1013 proposing a deferral. 
Such report shall also contain, with respect to each such proposed 
rescission or deferral, or each such reservation, the information 
required to be submitted in the special message with 
respect thereto under section 1012 or 1013. 

(2) Each report submitted under paragraph (1) shall be 
printed in the first issue of the Federal Register published after 
its submission. 
REPORTS BY COMPTROLLER GENERAL 

SEC. 1015. (a) FAILTJRE To TRANSMIT SPECIAL MESSAGE.—If the 
Comptroller General finds that the President, the Director of the Office 
of Management and Budget, the head of any department or agency of 
the United States, or any other officer or employee of the United 
States— 

(1) is to establish a reserve or proposes to defer budget authority 
with respect to which the President is required to transmit a 
special message under section 1012 or 1013; or 
(2) has ordered, permitted, or approved the establishment of 
such a reserve or a deferral of budget authority; 
and that the President has failed to transmit a special message with 
respect to such reserve or deferral, the Comptroller General shall 
make a report on such reserve or deferral and any available information 
concerning it to both Houses of Congress. The provisions of this 
part shall apply with respect to such reserve or deferral in the same 
manner and with the same effect as if such report of the Comptroller 
General were a special message transmitted by the President under 
section 1012 or 1013, and, for purposes of this part, such report shall 
be considered a special message transmitted under section 1012 or 
1013. 

(b) INCORRECT CLASSIFICATION or SPECIAL MESSAGE.—If the President 
has transmitted a special message to both Houses of Congress 
in accordance with section 1012 or 1013, and the Comptroller General 
believes that the President so transmitted the special message in 
accordance with one of those sections when the special message should 
have been transmitted in accordance with the other of those sections, 
the Comptroller General shall make a report to both Houses of the 
Congress setting forth his reasons. 
SUITS BY COMPTROLLER GENERAL 

SEC. 1016. 'If, under section 1012(b) or 1013(b), budget authority is 
required to be made available for obligation and such budget authority 
is not made available for obligation, the Comptroller General is hereby 
expressly empowered, through attorneys of his own selection, to bring 
a civil action in the United States District Court for the District of 
Columbia to require such budget authority to be made available for 
obligation, and such court is hereby expressly empowered to enter in 
such civil action, against any department, agency, officer, or employee 
of the United States, any decree, judgment, or order which may be 
necessary or appropriate to make such budget authority available for 
obligation. The courts shall give precedence to civil actions brought 
under this section, and to appeals and writs from decisions in such 


88 STAT.] PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 

actions, over all other civil actions, appeals, and writs. No civil action 
shall be brought by the Comptroller General under this section until 
the expiration of 25 calendar days of continuous session of the Congress 
following the date on which an explanatory statement by the 
Comptroller General of the circumstances giving rise to the action 
contemplated has been filed with the Speaker of the House of Eepresentatives 
and the President of the Senate. 

PROCEDURE IN HOUSE AND SENATE 

SEC. 1017. (a) REFERRAL.—Any rescission bill introduced with 
respect to a special message or impoundment resolution introduced 
with respect to a proposed deferral of budget authority shall be 
referred to the appropriate committee of the House of Representatives 
or the Senate, as the case may be. 

(b) DISCHARGE OF COMMITTEE.— 
(1) If the committee to which a rescission bill or impoundment 
resolution has been referred has not reported it at the end of 25 
calendar days of continuous session of the Congress after its introduction, 
it is in order to move either to discharge the committee 
from further consideration of the bill or resolution or to discharge 
the committee from further consideration of any other rescission 
bill with respect to the same special message or impoundment 
resolution with respect to the same proposed deferral, as the case 
may be, which has been referred to the committee. 
(2) A motion to discharge may be made only by an individual 
favoring the bill or resolution, may be made only if supported by 
one-fifth of the Members of the House involved (a quorum being 
present), and is highly privileged in the House and privileged in 
the Senate (except that it may not be made after the committee 
has reported a bill or resolution with respect to the same special 
message or the same proposed deferral, as the case may be); and 
debate thereon shall be limited to not more than 1 hour, the time 
to be divided in the House equally between those favoring and 
those opposing the bill or resolution, and to be divided in the 
Senate equally between, and controlled by, the majority leader 
and the minority leader or their designees. An amendment to the 
motion is not in order, and it is not in order to move to reconsider 
the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to. 
(c) FLOOR CONSIDERATION IN THE HOUSE.— 
(1) When the committee of the House of Representatives has 
reported, or has been discharged from further consideration of, a 
rescission bill or impoundment resolution, it shall at any time 
thereafter be in order (even though a previous motion to the same 
effect has been disagreed to) to move to proceed to the consideration 
of the bill or resolution. The motion shall be highly privileged 
and not debatable. An amendment to the motion shall not be in 
order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by 
which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to. 
(2) Debate on a rescission bill or impoundment resolution shall 
be limited to not more than 2 hours, which shall be divided 
equally between those favoring and those opposing the bill or 
resolution. A motion further to limit debate shall not be debatable. 
In the case of an impoundment resolution, no amendment to, or 
motion to recommit, the resolution shall be in order. It shall not 
be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which a recission bill 
or impoundment resolution is agreed to or disagreed to. 
Civil actions; 
2 5-day waiting 
period. 

Statement, 
filing. 

31 use 1407. 

Debate, 
limitation. 


Postponement 
motions. 

Appeals. 

Debate, time 
limitation. 

Conference reports. 


PUBLIC LAW 93-344-JULY 12, 1974 [88 STAT. 

(3) Motions to postpone, made with respect to the consideration 
of a rescission bill or impoundment resolution, and motions 
to proceed to the consideration of other business, shall be decided 
without debate. 
(4) All appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to 
the application of the Rules of the House of Representatives to 
the procedure relating to any rescission bill or impoundment resolution 
shall be decided without debate. 
(5) Except to the extent specifically provided in the preceding 
provisions of this subsection, consideration of any rescission bill 
or impoundment resolution and amendments thereto (or any 
conference report thereon) shall be governed by the Rules of the 
House of Representatives applicable to other bills and resolutions, 
amendments, and conference reports in similar circumstances. 
(d) FLOOR CONSIDERATION IN THE SENATE.— 
(1) Debate in the Senate on any rescission bill or impoundment 
resolution, and all amendments thereto (in the case of a rescission 
bill) and debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, 
shall be limited to not more than 10 hours. The time shall be 
equally divided between, and controlled by, the majority leader 
and the minority leader or their designees. 
(2) Debate in the Senate on any amendment to a rescission bill 
shall be limited to 2 hours, to be equally divided between, and controlled 
by, the mover and the manager of the bill. Debate on any 
amendment to an amendment, to such a bill, and debate on any 
debatable motion or appeal in connection with such a bill or an 
impoundment resolution shall be limited to 1 hour, to be equally 
divided between, and controlled by, the mover and the manager of 
the bill or resolution, except that in the event the manager of the 
bill or resolution is in favor of any such amendment, motion, or 
appeal, the time in opposition thereto, shall be controlled by the 
minority leader or his designee. No amendment that is not germane 
to the provisions of a rescission bill shall be received. Such leaders, 
or either of them, may, from the time under their control on the 
passage of a rescission bill or impoundment resolution, allot additional 
time to any Senator during the consideration of any amendment, 
debatable motion, or appeal. 
(3) A motion to further limit debate is not debatable. In the 
case of a rescission bill, a motion to recommit (except a motion to 
recommit with instructions to report back within a specified number 
of days, not to exceed 3, not counting any day on which the 
Senate is not in session) is not in order. Debate on any such motion 
to recommit shall be limited to one hour, to be equally divided 
between, and controlled by, the mover and the manager of the 
concurrent resolution. In the case of an impoundment resolution, 
no amendment or motion to recommit is in order. 
(4) The conference report on any rescission bill shall be in 
order in the Senate at any time after the third day (excluding Saturdays, 
Sundays, and legal holidays) following the day on which 
such a conference report is reported and is available to Members 
of the Senate. A motion to proceed to the consideration of the conference 
report may be made even though a previous motion to the 
same effect has been disagreed to. 

88 STAT. ] PUBLIC LAW 93-345-JULY 12, 1974 339 
(5) During the consideration in the Senate of the conference .^^^^^.^' '•'"'' 
report on any rescission bill, debate shall be limited to 2 hours, to 
be equally divided between, and controlled by, the majority leader 
and minority leader or their designees. Debate on any debatable 
motion or appeal related to the conference report shall be limited 
to 30 minutes, to be equally divided between, and controlled by, 
the mover and the manager of the conference report. 
(6) Should the conference report be defeated, debate on any 
request for a new conference and the appointment of conferees 
shall be limited to one hour, to be equally divided between, and 
controlled by, the manager of the conference report and the minority 
leader or his designee, and should any motion be made to 
instruct the conferees before the conferees are named, debate on 
such motion shall be limited to 30 minutes, to be equally divided 
between, and controlled by, the mover and the manager of the 
conference report. Debate on any amendment to any such instructions 
shall be limited to 20 minutes, to be equally divided between, 
and controlled by, the mover and the manager of the conference 
report. In all cases when the manager of the conference report is 
in favor of any motion, appeal, or amendment, the time in opposition 
shall be under the control of the minority leader or his 
designee. 
(7) In any case in which there are amendments in disagreement, 
time on each amendment shall be limited to 30 minutes, to be 
equally divided between, and controlled by, the manager of the 
conference report and the minority leader or his designee. No 
amendment that is not germane to the provisions of such amendments 
shall be received. 
Approved July 12, 1974. 

Public Law 93-345 

A N AC T July 12,1974 
To amend the Act of October 15, 1966 (80 Stat. 953, 20 U.S.C. 65a), relating to ^^-^^^y] 
the National Museum of the Smithsonian Institution, so as to authorize additional 
appropriations to the Smithsonian Institution for carrying out the 
purposes of said Act. 

Be it enacted hy the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled^ That section 2 (a) (4) Smithsonian 
of the National Museum Act of 1966 (20 U.S.C. 65a) is amended by '"App^roprTation 
inserting immediately before the semicolon the following: ", with authorization. 
emphasis on museum conservation and the development of a national 
institute for museum conservation". 

SEC. 2. Section 2(b) of such Act is amended to read as follows: 

"(b) There are authorized to be appropriated to the Smithsonian 
Institution such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of 
this Act: Provided^ That no more than $1,000,000 shall be appropriated 
annually through fiscal year 1977, of which no less than $200,000 
annually shall be allocated and used to carry out the purposes of section 
2(a) (4) of this Act.". 

Approved July 12, 1974. 


